Recommendations in covid-19 times: a view for home care
Recomendaes em tempos de COVID-19: um olhar para o cuidado domiciliar
Recomendaciones en tiempos de COVID-19: una mirada a la atencin domiciliaria
Luana ToninI
Maria Ribeiro LacerdaI
Ana Paula HermannII
Universidade Federal do Paran. Curitiba, Paran, Brazil.
Universidade Federal do Paran, Complexo Hospital de
Clnicas. Curitiba, Paran, Brazil.
Tonin L, Lacerda MR, Caceres NTG, Hermann AP.
Recommendations in covid-19 times: a view for home care.
Luana Tonin
EDITOR IN CHIEF: Dulce Aparecida Barbosa
ASSOCIATE EDITOR: Antonio Jos de Almeida Filho
Objective: To suggest recommendations for the practice of Home Nursing in the context of
COVID-19. Method: Reflective study, originated from readings associated with the theme,
available in current guidelines from the Pan American Health Organization, World Health
Organization and the Ministry of Health. Results: Recommendations were developed from
current scientific evidence for prevention of infections, control of epidemics and pandemics
in the Brazilian home scenario. Final considerations: the reflections achieved contribute to
guiding actions for better assistance to the patient, family caregivers and the community in
the perspective of safe home care with COVID-19, and it is characterized as an introductory
discussion on the theme, encouraging new studies to be carried out from the unfolding of
the current scenario.
Descriptors: SARS Virus; Homebound Persons; Home Health Nursing; Home Care Services;
Delivery of Health Care.
Objetivo: Propor recomendaes para a prtica de enfermagem domiciliar no contexto da
COVID-19. Mtodo: Estudo reflexivo, produzido com base em leituras correlacionadas com
a rea temtica, disponveis em diretrizes atuais da Organizao Pan-Americana da Sade,
Organizao Mundial da Sade e Ministrio da Sade. Resultados: Foram construdas recomendaes segundo evidncias cientficas atuais para preveno de infeces, controle de
epidemias e pandemias no contexto domiciliar brasileiro. Consideraes finais: As reflexes
realizadas contribuem para nortear aes com vistas a uma melhor assistncia ao paciente, familiares cuidadores e comunidade na perspectiva de um cuidado domiciliar seguro em relao
 COVID-19; se caracterizam como uma discusso inicial sobre o tema, estimulando que novos
estudos sejam realizados com base na evoluo do cenrio atual.
Descritores: Vrus da SARS; Pacientes Domiciliares; Enfermagem Domiciliar; Servios de
Assistncia Domiciliar; Assistncia  Sade.
Objetivo: Proponer recomendaciones para la prctica de enfermera domiciliaria en el contexto
de la COVID-19. Mtodo: Estudio reflexivo, producido a partir de lecturas relacionadas con el
rea temtica, disponibles en directrices actuales de la Organizacin Panamericana de la Salud,
Organizacin Mundial de la Salud y Ministerio de la Salud. Resultados: Han sido construidas
recomendaciones a partir de evidencias cientficas actuales para prevencin de infecciones,
control de epidemias y pandemias en el contexto domiciliario brasileo. Conclusiones: Las
reflexiones realizadas contribuyen para orientar acciones con vistas a una mejor asistencia al
paciente, familiares cuidadores y comunidad en la perspectiva de una atencin domiciliaria
segura en relacin a la COVID-19; se caracterizan como una discusin inicial sobre el tema,
estimulando que nuevos estudios sean realizados a partir de la evolucin del escenario actual.
Descriptores: Virus del SARS; Pacientes Domiciliares; Enfermera Domiciliar; Servicios de
Asistencia Domiciliaria; Asistencia a la Salud.
Recommendations in covid-19 times: a view for home care
Tonin L, Lacerda MR, Caceres NTG, Hermann AP.
At the end of December 2019, the first cases of the disease
called COVID-19, caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, were recorded
in Wuhan province, China(1), from that moment the numbers of
infected people increased and spread to all continents, but only
on March 11th, 2020, COVID-19 was defined by the World Health
Organization (WHO) as a pandemic(2).
Since then, health institutions around the world and nursing services have been under continuous pressure against a
potentially fatal respiratory disease, but it is still uncertain, as so
far there is no specific vaccine or treatment against the virus, so
quarantine and social isolation have been the measure taken by
several countries in an attempt to reduce transmission(2).
The role of nurses and other professionals goes beyond hospital environments, many of them work in the homes of patients,
and in this health scenario, home patients are usually those
syndromes, neurological, hypertensive, diabetic disorders, and
are also susceptible to the SARS-CoV-2 virus(3).
Home care stands out from the technical-scientific knowledge
learned during the training of nursing professionals, as entering
someones home and developing care actions requires much more
than knowing and acting. Because care is carried out in at the
patient and his familys environment, and the health professional
is a mere guest(4).
The home is the place of care, it is in this environment that
relationships are built and strengthened, beliefs, values, habits
and traditions are considered and discussed in the planning of
actions, as the home scenario influences and affects the recovery
and health of the patient(4).
The care provided by nurses at home, even if considered relevant, is still incipient given the specificity of the current scenario.
It is considered that studies addressing the theme of COVID-19
at home can be identified(3,5). However, currently, there are no
specific norms, policies, or scientific consensus on the description
and recommendation of nursing care at home for COVID-19, thus
showing a knowledge gap.
In this perspective, this theoretical-reflective essay was developed from readings associated with the theme, having as the main
sources materials produced by the World Health Organization,
Pan American Health Organization, and Ministry of Health. These
documents were developed from previous and current guidelines with the best scientific evidence for preventing infections,
controlling epidemics and pandemics.
To suggest recommendations for the practice of Home Nursing
in the context of COVID-19.
Home nursing practice and COVID-19
The WHO recommends that all people suspected of having
COVID-19 with severe acute respiratory infection be screened
at the first contact with the health system and that emergency
treatment be started based on the severity of the disease. It
also recommended that all cases confirmed in the laboratory
be isolated and treated in a health facility(3,5).
The WHO, later, updated the treatment guidelines for patients
with Acute Respiratory Infection associated with the SARS-CoV-2
virus including guidelines for vulnerable populations (for example,
the elderly, pregnant women and children). In occasions where isolation in a health facility from all cases is not possible, WHO emphasizes
prioritizing those most likely to have poor results: patients with severe
and critical illnesses and those with mild illness and risk of poor outcome (age > 60 years, cases with comorbidities, for example, chronic
cardiovascular disease, chronic respiratory disease, diabetes, cancer)(5-6).
If all mild cases cannot be isolated in health institutions, those
with mild illness and without risk factors may be isolated in nontraditional units, such as reused hotels, stadiums or gyms, where
they can remain until symptoms disappear and laboratory tests
for the COVID-19 virus are negative. Alternatively, patients with
mild illness and without risk factors can be managed at home(3,5-6).
For those with mild illness, hospitalization may not be necessary
or may not be possible due to the overcrowded health system, unless there is concern about the fast worsening of the condition(6).
Thus, if there are patients with mild illness, the care at home can be
considered, as long as they can be followed-up and treated by family
members and health professionals respectively(3).
Home care can also be considered when hospital care is not available or is unsafe (for example, size is limited and resources are unable
to meet the demand for health services). In any of these situations,
patients with mild symptoms(3) and without chronic conditions, such
as: pulmonary or heart disease, kidney failure or immunocompromised
conditions that subject the patient at increased risk of developing
complications, can be treated at home. This decision requires careful
clinical judgment by the multi-professional team and must involve
an assessment of the safety of the patients home environment for
continuity of care(5).
Recommendation for home nursing care in cases of
In cases where care should be provided at home, if possible, the
nurse should assess to check if the home environment is adequate for
the continuity of care; the health professional should assess whether
the patient and family can adhere to the recommended precautions
as part of the isolation of home care (for example, hand hygiene,
respiratory hygiene, cleanliness of the environment, movement
limitations around or at home) and if safety issues can be addressed
(for example, accidental ingestion and fire risks associated with the
use of alcohol-based friction)(3,5).
If and whenever possible, a communication link with the nurse
or the health team, or both, must be established during the period
of home care, that is, until the patients symptoms have completely
disappeared(3). But comprehensive information about COVID-19 and
its transmission is needed to define the length of isolation precautions
at home. Patients and family members should be informed about
personal hygiene, basic prevention and infection control measures
so that they can care as safely as possible for the person suspected of
having COVID-19 to prevent the infection from spreading to family
contacts(3,5). The patient and family members should receive ongoing
support and education, and monitoring should continue during home
Recommendations in covid-19 times: a view for home care
Tonin L, Lacerda MR, Caceres NTG, Hermann AP.
care. Nurses should guide patients and family members to follow the
recommendations explained in Charts 1 and 2 respectively.
The nurse, when preparing for home care, must select the necessary materials, must carry out a risk assessment to choose the
appropriate personal protective equipment, and in this case follow
the recommendations for contact precautions and droplets, and
others as explained in Chart 3.
Chart 1- Recommendations for the patients
Recommendations for family caregivers
- Clean and sanitize the bathroom surfaces at least once a day. First,
use common soap or detergent and, after rinsing, apply a common
disinfectant containing a 0.1% sodium hypochlorite (for example
equivalent to 1000 ppm)(3).
- Utensils used by the patient must be washed with water and common
detergent after use, and they can be reused (preferably by the patient)
instead of being discarded(3).
- Wash beddings in the machine/tank with regular washing powder, hot
water, between 6090 C (140194 F) and dry them thoroughly(3).
Recommendations for the patients*
- Stay alone in a well-ventilated room (that is, with open windows and an
open door).
- Avoid sharing spaces, if necessary, do this at separate times from other
residents of the house.
- Do not take in visitors until your complete recovery and the signs or
symptoms of COVID-19 disappear.
- Wash hands frequently and also before eating, after using the bathroom
and whenever your hands look dirty, using soap and water. If your hands
are not visibly dirty, you can rub them with 70% alcohol hand sanitizer.
- Use disposable paper towels to dry your hands after washing them with
soap and water. If they are not available, use clean cloth towels and replace
them frequently.
- Use a surgical mask to hold back respiratory secretions(7) and you should
change it whenever it is wet, avoiding handling it.
- Perform severe nose/nostrils hygiene when you do not tolerate a surgical
mask, that is, cover your mouth and nose with a disposable tissue when
coughing or sneezing, then discarding them and washing your hands. If
you use cloth tissues, wash them with soap and water.
- Clean and sanitize surfaces that are frequently touched such as
daily, when in private use. First, use common soap or detergent and,
after rinsing, apply a common disinfectant containing 0.1% sodium
hypochlorite (for example, equivalent to 1000 ppm)(3).
- Keep a covered trash can in the room with a plastic bag on top of it.
- Do not shake dirty clothing and prevent contact of contaminated
materials with the skin and clothing you are using(3).
- Protective gloves and clothing (for example, plastic aprons) should be
used when cleaning surfaces or when handling clothes or sheets soiled
with body fluids(3).
- Depending on the context, rubber (reusable) or disposable gloves
can be used. After use, rubber gloves should be cleaned with soap and
water and decontaminated with 0.1% sodium hypochlorite solution.
Disposable gloves must be discarded after each use.
- Wash hands before putting on and after removing gloves(3).
- Avoid other types of exposure to contaminated items in the patients
close environment (for example, do not share toothbrushes, cigarettes,
kitchen utensils, plates, drinks, towels, clothes or bedding).
- Gloves, masks and other waste generated during home care should be
placed in a trash can with a lid in the patients room before disposing of it
as infectious waste(8).
- Disposal of infectious waste must be provided for and provided by the
- In places where there is no specialized team, identification of the
contaminated material should be done for the management of the
selective collection team.
Chart 3 - Recommendations for Nurses in home care
Recommendations for Nurses in home care
- Place contaminated clothing in a laundry bag(3).
- Stay away from vulnerable people, the elderly and immunosuppressed
- Pay attention to the symptoms and if you feel a worsening request a
Note: * If the patient is unable to perform the tasks mentioned above, assistance from a family
caregiver is necessary.
- Wear a surgical mask that covers your mouth and nose when you are
in the same room as the patient. Masks must not be touched or handled
during use(3).
- Replace the mask immediately if it gets wet or dirty(3).
- Remove the mask using the appropriate technique - that is, do not
touch the front, but untie it.
- Discard the mask immediately after use and wash hands.
Chart 2 - Recommendations for family caregivers
- Wear gloves and a disposable N95 mask when providing mouth or
respiratory care and handling feces, urine and other waste.
Recommendations for family caregivers
- Wash hands before and after removing gloves and masks.
- Minimize sharing spaces. Family members must stay in a different room
or, if this is not possible, keep a distance of at least 1 meter from the sick
person (for example, sleeping in a separate bed)(6).
- Keep sharing spaces (for example, kitchen, bathroom) well ventilated
(with windows open).
- Reduce the number of caregivers. Preferably, designate a person
who is in good health and who does not have chronic conditions or is
- Wash hands after any type of contact with patients or their close
environment(7), and also before and after preparing food, before eating,
after using the bathroom and whenever your hands look dirty, using soap
and water. If hands are not visibly dirty, 70% alcohol-based rubbing can
be used.
- Use disposable paper towels to dry your hands after washing them
with soap and water. If they are not available, use clean cloth towels and
replace them frequently.
To be continued
- Do not reuse masks or gloves.
- Disposal of materials must be provided for and provided by the local
- In places where there is no specialized team, identification of the
contaminated material should be done for the management of the
selective collection team.
- Perform, when indicated and possible, the collection of diagnostic tests
before releasing patients from home isolation.
- Establish communication with the patient and family caregiver during
the observation period.
- Supervise the health of others living in the same house by calling
them regularly, but best and if possible, through daily home visits, so
that specific diagnostic tests can be performed as needed(9).
- Keep an eye on compliance with home isolation by the patient
and others living in the same house, clarifying them about the
importance of this measure.
To be continued
Recommendations in covid-19 times: a view for home care
Tonin L, Lacerda MR, Caceres NTG, Hermann AP.
Recommendations for Nurses in home care
- Give psychological support to the patient and family members and
call on psychology professionals when necessary.
- Inform the people living in the same house in advance about when
and where to seek care, if they become ill, the most appropriate
transport to use, when and where to go for the designated health
facility and what precautions should be followed(9).
- Inform the patient and family about possible signs of worsening of
the clinical condition and conduct to be followed.
- Record all information in the patients medical record, remembering
that paper records should be avoided and electronic devices used for
registration purposes and should be disinfected after use.
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS
This reflection aimed to suggest recommendations based on recent
evidence to guide nurses work in home care with prevention and
infection control in confirmed or suspected patients with COVID-19.
It is hoped that these guidelines will promote practical strategies for home nursing care with people and communities, aiming
to expand the engagement and attitude in the search for better
resolution of cases and situations of health risk in their real and
potential scenarios.
It is believed that the recommendations now made can contribute to the expansion of discussions on home nursing care in
the context of COVID-19, also, to guide actions to improve care
about the safe care of the patient, family and territory.
Thus, this study is characterized as an initial step in the discussion of home care and COVID-19, it may offer subsidies for new
reflections that promote and better elucidate the contributions
of nursing from the advance in the world and Brazilian scenario,
contributing to teaching and research.
As a limitation, these guidelines involve the need to adapt
the political, social and professional structures, so that the
professional can exercise, incorporate and implement such
Organizao Pan-Americana da Sade (BR). Folha informativa  COVID-19 (doena causada pelo novo coronavrus) [Internet]. Braslia (DF): OPAS;
World Health Organization. Home care for patients with COVID-19 presenting with mild symptoms and management of their contacts: Interim
World Health Organization. Home care for patients with Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infection presenting
with mild symptoms and management of contacts: interim guidance [Internet]. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2018 [cited 2020 Jan
World Health Organization. Infection prevention and control of epidemic- and pandemic-prone acute respiratory diseases in health
World Health Organization. Clinical management of severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) when COVID-19 disease is suspected: Interim
World Health Organization. WHO guidelines on hand hygiene in health care: first global patient safety challenge [Internet]. Geneva: World
World Health Organization. Global surveillance for human infection with novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV): interim guidance, 31 January 2020
