Rev. Latino-Am. Enfermagem
Which curve provides the best explanation of the growth in confirmed
COVID-19 cases in Chile?*
Vctor Daz-Narvez1
David San-Martn-Roldn2
Aracelis Calzadilla-Nez3
Pablo San-Martn-Roldn4
that could explain the epidemiological behavior of the
infection by COVID-19 and derive the possible causes that
contribute to explain the corresponding model and the
Alexander Parody-Muoz5
Gonzalo Robledo-Veloso
Objective: to explore the best type of curve or trend model
health implications that can be inferred. Method: data were
collected from the COVID-19 reports of the Department of
Epidemiology, Ministry of Health, Chile. Curve adjustment
studies were developed with the data in four different models:
quadratic, exponential, simple exponential smoothing, and
double exponential smoothing. The significance level used
was 0.05. Results: the curve that best fits the evolution of
the accumulated confirmed cases of COVID-19 in Chile is the
doubly-smoothed exponential curve. Conclusion: the number
of infected patients will continue to increase. Chile needs to
Health Context.
Universidad Andres Bello, Facultad de Odontologa,
Santiago, Chile.
and control measures. The behavior of the population plays a
fundamental role. We suggest not relaxing restrictions and
Universidad de Valparaso, Facultad de Medicina, Escuela
further improving epidemiological surveillance. Emergency
de Obstetricia y Puericultura, Valparaso, Chile.
preparations are needed and more resource elements need
Universidad Bernardo OHiggins, Facultad de Salud,
Santiago, Chile.
remain vigilant and adjust the strategies around the prevention
Universidad Mayor, Facultad de Ciencias, Escuela de
Nutricin y Diettica, Santiago, Chile.
Universidad Metropolitana, Barranquilla, Colombia.
Universidad de Chile, Facultad de Ciencias, Santiago,
to be added to the current health support. This prediction is
provisional and depends on keeping all intervening variables
constant. Any alteration will modify the prediction.
Descriptors: COVID-19; Coronavirus; 2019-nCoV; Coronavirus
Infections; Pandemics; Epidemiology.
Daz-Narvez V, San-Martn-Roldn D, Calzadilla-Nez A, San-Martn-Roldn P, Parody-Muoz A,
Robledo-Veloso G. Which curve provides the best explanation of the growth in confirmed
COVID-19 cases in Chile?. Rev. Latino-Am. Enfermagem. 2020;28:e3346. [Access ___ __ ____];
month day
Rev. Latino-Am. Enfermagem 2020;28:e3346.
formulate effective control strategies. The objective is to
know what type of curve or model can best explain the
The rising pneumonia called COVID-19, caused
epidemiological behavior of the accumulated confirmed
by SARS-CoV-2, exhibits strong infectivity but less
cases of COVID-19 and identify the possible causes that
virulence when compared to SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV
contribute to explain the corresponding model and the
in terms of morbidity and mortality. It is not only a virus
health implications that can be inferred.
that spreads from one person to another, but probably
spreads because many people become infected in various
places through different mechanisms. Restricting the
movement of people, reducing contact, disseminating
Data were collected from the COVID-19 reports
key high-frequency prevention information through
from the Department of Epidemiology of the Ministry
of Health in Chile (MINSAL). The data are publicly
to respond quickly to the contingency, can help contain
the pandemic(1-5).
The actual number of infected cases is much
with the data in four different models: quadratic(13),
larger than that reported worldwide. The observed
exponential(13-14), simple exponential smoothing using the
mortality rate of COVID-19 is estimated at around 4.8%
formula [Ft = F (t-1) +   A(t-1)] , where Ft = new prognosis,
worldwide. Although this rate is low in Chile, this estimate
may be incorrect due to underestimation, because
earlier prognosis and double exponential smoothing
using Holts method with trend adjustment [FITt = Ft +
severe cases is higher and, as active cases increase,
Tt]; where FITt is the forecasted value]; the components
the health resources do not support the demand and
of this formula are: [Ft=F(t-1) +  (A
overestimation, considering that the vast majority of
y [Tt =  (Ft  F
cases without symptoms or with mild symptoms are not
estimated: the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE);
the mean absolute deviation (MAD); the mean squared
= earlier prognosis and A(t-1) = actual value of the
. The following were
The COVID-19 pandemic is an important international
deviation (MSD). Criterion for choosing the best curve:
test for the medical and scientific community, as it
small error coefficients. Indicator  is the weighting used
reveals weaknesses in the management of emerging
in the level component of the smoothened estimate and
viral diseases and reminds us that contagious diseases
 is the weighting used in the trend component of the
should never be underestimated. In addition, it has
smoothened estimate (similar to a moving average of
strained health systems due to the virulence and excess
the differences between consecutive observations)(15-16).
demand on hospitals
To adjust the level of smoothing of the data (elimination
It is essential to understand the transmission
of irregular fluctuations), the optimal ARIMA model was
dynamics of the infection, as it could determine whether
used for weighting, minimizing the sum of the square
outbreak control measures are exerting a significant effect.
residues(18-19). The absolute error of each measure was
The numbers of newly infected cases largely depend on the
the difference () between the actual observed value
effectiveness of the control measures. Several governments
and the predicted value of confirmed cases for the same
have rapidly incorporated recent scientific findings into
day. The median and interquartile range were estimated
public policies at community, regional and national levels to
after checking for the normality of the absolute errors
slow down and/or prevent the further spread of COVID-19.
using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Minitab 18.0
Control measures such as quarantine, travel restrictions
and airport inspections for travellers have been widely
implemented to contain the spread of infections. The
software was used. The significance level was   0.05.
effectiveness of these containment measures to control
the outbreak is inconclusive though(1,3,5-6,11).
It is advisable for government entities to report
regression equations of the observed data curves of
on the current state of the pandemic in daily reports,
confirmed, adjusted and predicted cases in the quadratic,
exponential, simple exponential smoothing and double
COVID-19. Statistics need to be read carefully though,
exponential smoothing models. The MAD, MAPE, and
as it is leading to massive panic without organized
MSD coefficients are lower in the double exponential
solutions related to the redistribution of resources(12).
smoothing curve, which shows that the curve that best
Understanding the epidemiological characteristics
of COVID-19 transmission in Chile is essential to
fits the evolution of the accumulated confirmed cases of
COVID-19 in Chile is the one described above.
Daz-Narvez V, San-Martn-Roldn D, Calzadilla-Nez A, San-Martn-Roldn P, Parody-Muoz A, Robledo-Veloso G.
Exactness measures
Accumulated confirmed cases
Accumulated confirmed cases
Exactness measures
Day/Month Year 2020
Day/Month Year 2020
Figura 1  Simple exponential smoothing model
Figura 1**  Double exponential smoothing model
Smoothing constant
Exactness measures
Casos confirmados acumulados
Accumulated confirmed cases
Smoothing constant
Exactness measures
Day/Month Year 2020
Day/Month Year 2020
the model. Chile, 2020
predicted value on the previous day of confirmed cases
results of the forecasted number of confirmed cases
(with its corresponding confidence interval) and the
from March 3rd, 2020 to August 30th, 2020. The MAPE
actual result of confirmed cases that occurred on the
coefficients are the lowest in the double exponential
predicted day. The results of actual confirmed cases
smoothing curve and the same is true for the MAD
differ little from the predicted value (S-W = 0.907;
median = 53.2 and interquartile range= 72.80) and,
As observed, the confidence intervals increase as
with some exceptions, the actual value was within the
predicted further ahead and, therefore, the estimation
estimated confidence interval for the predicted day.
error increases(18).
confidence interval) and the actual result of confirmed cases that occurred on the predicted day, using the double
exponential smoothing method. Chile, 2020
Prognosis [*95% CI]
Rev. Latino-Am. Enfermagem 2020;28:e3346.
Prognosis [*95% CI]
Accumulated confirmed cases
*CI = Confidence interval; CC = Confirmed cases
Smoothing constants
Exactness measures
Day/Month Year
* IP = prediction interval; MAPE = Mean absolute percentage error; MAD = Mean absolute deviation; MSD = Mean squared deviation
Daz-Narvez V, San-Martn-Roldn D, Calzadilla-Nez A, San-Martn-Roldn P, Parody-Muoz A, Robledo-Veloso G.
using the double exponential smoothing model. Chile, 2020
LL* - CI
UL - CI
*LL: Lower limit;
CI: Confidence interval;
UL: Upper limit
contact with the cases and monitor them so that patients
can quickly access clinical care. If none of these points
The progress of the COVID-19 pandemic in Chile fits
are achieved, any action or indication will be ineffective
well into a model and we study its predictive capacity.
in containing the pandemic. Chile has disseminated
By analyzing the epidemiological characteristics and
neither the notified contact indicators nor the indicator
of test results delivered within 24 hours. Contacts are
disease, the key to successful outbreak control is
being notified, but without any specification of the time.
obtained through mitigation strategies(6).
There are no statistics either with regard to compliance
The World Health Organization (WHO) has indicated
that easing restrictions does not end the epidemic in any
with quarantines or supervised discharge of confirmed
country. Ending the epidemic will require a sustained
WHO has provided support for epidemiological
effort by individuals, communities and governments
studies of seroprevalence, which suggest that the
percentage of the population infected with antibodies
surveillance is recommended to detect cases early and
may be relatively small (2-3%), without knowing how
isolate them, quickly locate those who have been in
long this immunity lasts(20).
Rev. Latino-Am. Enfermagem 2020;28:e3346.
The mathematical model of any process tries to
19th). It should be mentioned that active cases in Chile
describe its basic components and tries to predict some
represent 47.04% (SD=1.96) of confirmed cases, as
general trends, but it will never be able to provide an
of May 5th, 2020. The propensity of this percentage
exact description and prediction
. Various causes
should tend to decrease gradually and slowly according
impede this in an epidemiological context: (a) no model
to international experience, but it has stagnated for
can include all variables that influence a process; (b)
13 days between 45-50%. This stagnation is probably
there are unknown variables that cannot be incorporated
due to the fact that the public health strategies and the
in the prediction; (c) these variables depend on
populations behavior are not equivalent to that of the
conditions and the specific nature of the virus, on the
countries mentioned(26-38).
social conditions people live in, and on the immunity
Chile needs to remain vigilant and adjust strategies
status of a particular patient; (d) the socio-economic
around prevention and control measures, which means
infrastructure of a country; (e) the capacities of the
to improve health actions and to strengthen surveillance
health system at a given time, f) a smart health policy
systems and public health infrastructure to provide the
that a country could implement to prevent the spread
early detection and rapid response. We hope, for the
and take the most appropriate measures to mitigate the
sake of Chilean health, that the support of infrastructure
impact of the process associated to these infections to
and health assets achieve the results in terms of
the maximum; and (g) on the intelligence and level of
effectiveness and do not pose a problem of needs and
resources. At the same time, emergency preparations
are necessary in response to a more serious outbreak
in other parts of the world. The knowledge of these
that may occur(1,6).
variables and the consequent intentional modification of
The monitoring of simple but at the same time
all or some of these variables will modify the contagion
critical parameters of patient behavior at an intensive
rate in a positive or negative way. Therefore, this rate
care unit (ICU) grants us critical information to know
and the specific derivations of the nature of all of these
these parameters and their evolution in terms of severity,
variables make it impossible to create an exact forecast
providing information for the sake of control, intervention
of the future. Thus, the model presented here can only
and mitigation strategy proposals. The current use of the
provide a basis for a comprehension mechanism, under
intensive care capacity for COVID-19 patients represents
the type of circumstances, constraints and current
on average 17.10% (SD=1.35) of the total available ICU
population conditions. All of these aspects limit the
beds in Chile. Whether the country reaches 20,111 active
predictive capacity and attention needs to be paid to
cases (42,751 confirmed cases, according to the active
changes in the determining factors that may constitute
case/confirmed case ratio), the number of intensive
the cause compelling to change the model to explain
care beds will not be sufficient for COVID-19 patients
the behavior of the pandemic. One of the transcendental
and this health support would collapse. This would
aspects in epidemiology is to try to predict the evolution
happen on May 22nd, 2020. This calculation considers
of infectious diseases. This attempt is usually done
the current number of intensive care beds available in
through models that consider the progress of cases over
Chile: 3,264 and the average percentage of intensive
time in a certain place, transmissibility, among other
care capacity use for COVID-19 patients in Chile, which
causes. Nevertheless, these do not include the specific
is 8.28% (SD=1.06), and intensive care capacity use
characteristics of the affected population(23-25).
in non-COVID-19 patients, which is 48.96% (SD=1.74)
The experience of European countries that have
. If the number of ICU beds remains constant and
indicated specific population intervention measures has
the incidence does not decelerate (as it falls within the
shown that the deceleration of the incidence is achieved
error margin of the prediction), but the ratio of active
when a percentage or critical mass of confirmed cases
cases/confirmed cases decreases, then the scenario of
is reached, compared to the general population. That
ICU collapse is likely.
is the case for: Austria (0.12%), Norway (0.12%),
Ventilation support is the cornerstone of the
management of subjects with respiratory failure due
(0.15%), Denmark (0.15%), Switzerland (0.17%),
to COVID-19. The current use of invasive mechanical
United Kingdom (0.18%), Portugal (0.18%), Iceland
ventilation (IMV) for COVID-19 patients represents on
(0.18%), Sweden (0.20%), Spain (0.21%) and Italy
average 18.48% (SD=1.22) of the total mechanical
(0.21%). It is estimated that the slowdown in the
ventilators (MV) available in Chile. If the country reaches
incidence in Chile would be achieved when the average
28,423 active cases (60,418 confirmed cases, according
of 31.527 (SD=12.160) confirmed cases is reached.
to the active case/confirmed case ratio), MV will not be
That happens on May 13th, 2020 (May 10th and July
sufficient for the ventilatory needs of COVID-19 patients
Daz-Narvez V, San-Martn-Roldn D, Calzadilla-Nez A, San-Martn-Roldn P, Parody-Muoz A, Robledo-Veloso G.
and this health support would collapse. This would
curve. From this model, it follows that the number of
happen on June 4 , 2020. This calculation considers the
infected cases will continue to increase. The number of
current number of MV available in Chile: 1,825 and the
confirmed cases will grow stronger and within a short time
average percentages in Chile of IMV use in COVID-19
if the population behavior and public health measures
patients, which is 5.01% (SD=0.67), and of IMV use
are not in line with the size of this international public
in non-COVID-19 patients, which is 21.91% (SD=1.17)
health emergency. We hope that the results will enable
. If the number of MV remains constant and the
the medical staff and leaders to make decisions. In no
incidence rate (as it falls within the error margin of the
case should restrictions be relaxed and epidemiological
prediction) and the active case/confirmed case ratio
surveillance needs improvements, as this is not the end
do not decrease, the scenario of health failure due to
of the pandemic.
the lack of MV is plausible, although less likely than the
collapse of the intensive care system.
This predictive model is provisional and depends
on the constant use of all the variables maintained.
Any change will undoubtedly modify the prediction and,
therefore, daily variations should be monitored, although
the predictive model does not present considerable and
important faults in the current reality. The predictions of
this model have been good and have a safety coefficient
that allows us to calculate with some slack the public
health needs the care for the current cases might require.
This information is relevant when deciding on measures
to contain an epidemic. The appropriate fit and good
predictive capacity of this model makes it possible to
propose it as an epidemiological method for monitoring
and predicting the progression of infectious diseases in the
local situation, e.g. regions, provinces and communes(43).
Our approach has limitations. This study was
based on the cases reported by MINSAL and contains
the biases of case confirmation and information, which
may be delayed with respect to the occurrence of cases,
the delay in the appearance of symptoms due to the
incubation period and the high proportion of unreported
cases as a result of limited detection and testing capacity.
Moreover, data sources may be biased, incomplete or
only capture certain aspects, versus others that may
be equally relevant, such as chronic pathologies, risk
factors, nutritional status, among others.
This analysis does not necessarily represent the actual
situation of the cases, as it excludes confirmed cases in
laboratories not considered by surveillance systems and
sub-clinical cases. This model does not consider variations
due to seasonal changes, social aggregation, etc. either.
In addition, it is dependent on the addition of new MV
to the health network. This analysis of epidemiological
characteristics provides important information on the
behavior of COVID-19 to propose effective control
strategies at all levels of health care(7).
The type of curve that best explains the behavior
of COVID-19 in Chile is a doubly smoothed exponential
1. Epidemiology Working Group for NCIP Epidemic
Response, Chinese Center for Disease Control and
(COVID-19) in China. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za
2. Guo YR, Cao QD, Hong ZS, Tan YY, Chen SD, Jin HJ,
et al. The origin, transmission and clinical therapies on
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak - an
update on the status. Mil Med Res. 2020 Mar;7(1):11.
3. Adhikari SP, Meng S, Wu YJ, Mao YP, Ye RX, Wang QZ,
et al. Epidemiology, causes, clinical manifestation and
diagnosis, prevention and control of coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) during the early outbreak period: a scoping
4. World Health Organization. Novel Coronavirus-Japan
(ex-China). [Internet] Geneva: WWHO; 2020 [cited Feb 1,
5. Rothan HA, Byrareddy SN. The epidemiology and
6. Park M, Cook AR, Lim JT, Sun Y, Dickens BL. A
Current Evidence. J Clin Med. 2020 Mar;9(4). pii: E967.
7. Departamento de Epidemiologa. Ministerio de Salud
(Chile). Situacin Epidemiolgica COVID-19. [Internet].
8. World Health Organization. COVID-19 Dashboard.
[Internet]. 2020 [cited Apr 22, 2020]. Available from:
Taherpour N, Rahimi S, Izadi N, et al. Epidemiological
Rev. Latino-Am. Enfermagem 2020;28:e3346.
Arch Acad Emerg Med. [Internet]. 2020 Apr [cited Apr
recommendations for international traffic in relation to
COVID-19 outbreak. [Internet]. Geneva: WHO; 2020
10. World Health Organization. Coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) Pandemic. [Internet]. Geneva: WHO; 2020
22. Daz V, Calzadilla A, Lpez H. 2005. Una aproximacin
11. Kucharski AJ, Russell TW, Diamond C, Liu Y, Edmunds
al concepto de Hecho Cientfico Cinta Moebio. [Internet].
J, Funk S, et al.
2005 [Acceso 1 feb 2020];22:100-11, Disponible en:
Early dynamics of transmission and
12. McCullough PA, Eidt J, Rangaswami J, Lerma E,
Tumlin J, Wheelan K, et al. Urgent need for individual
mobile phone and institutional reporting of at home,
13. Canavos GC. Probabilidad y Estadstica. Aplicaciones
y Mtodos. Madrid: McGraw-Hill; 1988. Captulo 14,
14. Piskunov N. Clculo Diferencial e Integral. 2.ed.
15. Mauricio JA. Introduccin al Anlisis de Series
Madrid; 2007 [Acceso 22 abr 2020]. pp. 125-137.
16. Taylor JK, Cihon C. Statistical Techniques for Data
Analysis. 2.ed. Miami: Chapman & Hall/CRC; 2004.
17. Holt CC. Forecasting Seasonals and Trends by
Exponentially Weighted Moving Averages. Pittsburgh,
pronsticos. [Internet] Bahia Blanca: Universidad
23. Moarefian M, Pascal JA, Fundamental mathematical
model shows that applied electrical field enhances
24. Salim F, Ioannidis M, Grecki T. Experimentally
validated mathematical model of analyte uptake by
permeation passive samplers. Environ Sci Process
25. Canals L Mauricio, Canals C Andrea. Percolacin
de la epidemia de influenza AH1N1 en el mundo:
[Internet]. 2020 [cited Apr 22, 2020]. Available from:
CoV-2), COVID-19, France et Monde. [Internet]. 2020
28. Department of Health and Social Care and Public
Health (England) Number of coronavirus (COVID-19)
19. Jimnez JF, Gzquez JC, Snchez R. la capacidad
cases and risk in the UK. [Internet]. 2020 [cited May 5,
predictiva en los mtodos de Box-Jenkins y Holt-
Winters: una aplicacin al sector turstica. Rev. Eur.
Dir. Econ. Empres. [Internet]. 2006 [Acceso 1 feb
29. Federal Office of Public Health (Switzerland). New
coronavirus. [Internet]. 2020 [cited May 5, 2020].
opening remarks at the media briefing on COVID-19
- 20 April 2020. [Internet]. Geneva: WHO; 2020 [cited
COVID-19 en Espaa. [Internet]. 2020 [Acceso mayo
Daz-Narvez V, San-Martn-Roldn D, Calzadilla-Nez A, San-Martn-Roldn P, Parody-Muoz A, Robledo-Veloso G.
31. Ministrio da Sade (Portugal). Direo-Geral da
and demand. Health Policy. 2005 Mar;71(3):289-301.
Sade. Disponibilizao de Dados. [Internet]. 2020
41. Sociedad Chilena de Medicina Intensiva. Encuesta
diaria realidad nacional intensivo 05 de Mayo. [Internet].
32. Ministero della Salute (Italia). Covid-19, i casi in
Italia il 28 aprile ore 18. [Internet]. 2020 [cited May 5,
42. Ministerio de Ciencia, Tecnologa, Conocimiento e
Innovacin (Chile). Datos COVID-19. [Internet]. 2020
33. Directorate of Health (Iceland). COVID-19 in Iceland 
Statistics. [Internet]. 2020 [cited May 5, 2020]. Available
43. Canals L Mauricio. Predictibilidad a corto plazo del
nmero de casos de la influenza pandmica AH1N1
Affairs, Health, Care and Consumer Protection. Official
COVID-19 Dashboard  Explanatory Notes [Internet].
Current information about COVID-19 (novel coronavirus)
[Internet]. 2020 [cited May 5, 2020]. Available from:
37. Folkhlsomyndigheten. Bekrftade fall i Sverige 
daglig uppdatering. [Internet]. 2020 [cited May 5, 2020].
38. Sundhedsstyrelsen. COVID-19 update: statistics
and charts. [Internet]. 2020 [cited May 5, 2020].
39. Haniffa R, Isaam I, De Silva AP, Dondorp AM, De
Keizer NF. Performance of critical care prognostic
scoring systems in low and middle-income countries:
40. Wild C, Narath M. Evaluating and planning ICUs:
methods and approaches to differentiate between need
Ricardo Alexandre Arcncio
David San Martin-Roldn
Copyright  2020 Revista Latino-Americana de Enfermagem
offered. Recommended for maximum dissemination and use of
