SHORT REPORT
Open Access
Evaluation of SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA in fecal
Alvaro Mesoraca, Katia Margiotti* , Antonella Viola, Antonella Cima, Davide Sparacino and Claudio Giorlandino
The need for timely establishment of a complete diagnostic protocol of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is demanded worldwide. We selected 15 positive novel coronavirus disease 19 (COVID19) patients with mild or no symptom. Initially, fecal samples were negative in the 67% (10/15) of the cases, while
33% (5/10) of the cases were positive. After serial virus RNA testing, 73% (11/15) of the cases resulted positive to
fecal specimens. In particular, 15 days after the first positive respiratory specimens test, 6 fecal specimens became
positive for SARS-CoV-2 RNA, while 13 respiratory test returned negative result. In conclusion, qRT-PCR assays of
fecal specimens, is an important step to control infection, suggesting that samples remained positive for SARS-CoV2 RNA longer time then respiratory tract samples. Our results enhance the recent knowledge on this emerging
infectious disease and offer suggestions for a more complete diagnostic strategy.
Keywords: Acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA, Novel coronavirus
disease 19 (COVID-19), Fecal specimens, Respiratory specimens
On December 31st 2019 China reported the first cases
of atypical pneumonia in Wuhan, the capital of Hubei
province. The causative virus was found to be a Betacoronavirus, closely related to the severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV-1) from 2003 and
similar to Sarbecoviruses isolated from bats [1, 2]. It was
therefore termed SARS-CoV-2 and the disease it causes
was named COVID-19 (Corona Virus Disease 2019) [3].
The virus genome and early epidemiological and clinical
features of the infection in adults have been reported
[46]. The infection is estimated to have about 5 days of
incubation period and commonly causes fever, cough,
myalgia and pneumonia in patients [4]. Several real time
RT-PCR assays protocols for detection of SARS-CoV-2
RNA have been developed and approved from Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention Nucleic acid in US
and are now widely employed to diagnose COVID-19
ALTAMEDICA, Human Genetics laboratories, Altamedica Main Centre,
Artemisia SpA, Viale Liegi 45, 00198 Rome, Italy
disease [7, 8]. Current scientific literature has shown that
viral RNA measurements from fecal specimens might be
last longer than that from respiratory tract [9, 10].
Herein, we selected fifteen positive patients for SARSCoV-2 RNA in their respiratory tract, and we followed
the viral shedding from respiratory and gastrointestinal
tracts by a series of respiratory and fecal specimens test
by real time RT-PCR assays. Has been reported that the
duration of viral shedding in fecal specimens, can be detected for nearly 5 weeks after that the patients respiratory samples tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 RNA [9].
Moreover, recent meta-analysis on 4243 COVID-19 patients reported that stool samples from 48.1% of patients
tested positive for virus RNA, among these patients
70.3% tested positive for RNA virus even after respiratory specimens tested negative [11]. The aim of this
study was to evaluate SARS-CoV-2 virus fecal shedding
and duration in comparison with SARS-CoV-2 virus in
the respiratory tract. Determine whether a virus is still
present in the gastrointestinal tract of the patients several days after respiratory tract samples became negative,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
RT Respiratory tract, FS Fecal specimens, F Female, M Male
is important in order to understand and define a
complete diagnostic strategy for SARS-CoV-2 viral
Results and discussion
Between March 4 and April 20, 2020, we collected every
5 days respiratory and fecal specimens from fifteen
COVID-19 patients. All 15 samples tested positive in
their respiratory swab in the first 10 days, when all internal controls exhibit the expected performance, a specimen is considered positive if two out of three SARSCoV-2 target genes (gene E, gene N, gene ORF1ab)
showed a cycle threshold (CT) values 41, as indicated
on manufactural guidelines (Novel Coronavirus (2019nCoV) Real Time Multiplex RT-PCR kit, LifeRiver Ltd).
Among this 15 samples 67% (10/15) tested negative in
their fecal specimens, and 33% (5/10) tested positive in
samples became positive 2 weeks after their first positive
fecal specimens positive for SARS-CoV-2 RNA virus, 6
samples remained positive until the end of the sampling
patients had fecal samples positive test 25 days more
in accordance with previous study were has been shown
that rectal swabs can become and remain positive for
longer time after the respiratory specimens testing had
become negative [9, 10]. Even though patients had mild
or non-symptoms, is well none that asymptomatic transmission is possible, and potential fecal-oral transmission
must to be considered to reduce the risk of transmission.
Respiratory transmission is still the primary route for
SARS-CoV-2 infection and further research on this field
must be done in order to understand SARS-CoV-2 virus
better and implement the diagnostic strategy. Our preliminary data support the idea that negative fecal result,
might be a necessary criterion in addition to the actual
two consecutive negative testing in respiratory samples,
before considering the patients completely recovered
and no more infective.
A total of fifteen patients with mild or no symptoms
were selected for this study. This case series was approved by the institutional Ethics Committee of Artemisia SpA. Fifteen patients with respiratory specimens
positive for SARS-CoV-2 RNA virus from March 4, to
April 20, 2020 were enrolled. Oral consent was obtained
from patients. The respiratory and fecal specimens were
collected every 5 days from March 4, 2020, until final
date of the study. The diagnosis by real-time RT-PCR
kits (QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit, Catalog #: 52904,
QIAGEN). The Real-time RT-PCR was done by using
the Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) Real Time Multiplex RT-PCR kit from LifeRiver Ltd., and iQ5 real-time
PCR detection system (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) following the manufacture instruction. The kit measures
simultaneously 3 target genes: SARS-CoV-2 gene E, gene
N, gene ORF1ab thus complying with international validated testing protocols (Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV)
Real Time Multiplex RT-PCR kit, LifeRiver Ltd).
A fecal SARS-CoV-2 RNA virus test using real-time RTPCR techniques was used to evaluate the virus shedding
2 weeks after a positive respiratory tract swab. Results
from this study demonstrated that patients had fecal
samples positive test 25 days more than their respiratory
tract test. Some limitations refer to the number of samples analysed, more samples will better define the virus
shedding in feces and the utility to recommend routine
fecal specimens tasting. In conclusion, fecal specimens
has great potential benefit for more accurate screening
of SARS-CoV-2 infections, and it has already generated
vast interest in the medical community.
COVID-19: Corona Virus Disease 2019; SARS-CoV-2: Acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2
Not applicable.
AM, and KM conceived the study and provided insights on data. DS, AV
performed the laboratory analyses. CG participated in conceiving the study
Not applicable.
Availability of data and materials
Not applicable.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
The study was approved by the local ethical committee of Artemisia SPA,
and all participating patients given them oral consent.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Competing interests
Not applicable.
1. Wu F, Zhao S, Yu B, Chen Y-M, Wang W, Song Z-G, et al. A new coronavirus
associated with human respiratory disease in China. Nature. 2020;579(7798):
2. Zhou P, Yang X-L, Wang X-G, Hu B, Zhang L, Zhang W, et al. A pneumonia
outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin. Nature.
3. Coronaviridae Study Group of the International Committee on Taxonomy of
Viruses. The species Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus:
classifying 2019-nCoV and naming it SARS-CoV-2. Nat Microbiol. 2020;5(4):
4. Chen N, Zhou M, Dong X, Qu J, Gong F, Han Y, et al. Epidemiological and
clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia in
Wuhan, China: a descriptive study. Lancet. 2020;395(10223):50713.
5. Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, Zhao J, Hu Y, et al. Clinical features of
patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet.
6. Wang D, Hu B, Hu C, Zhu F, Liu X, Zhang J, et al. Clinical characteristics of
138 hospitalized patients with 2019 novel coronavirus-infected pneumonia
in Wuhan, China. JAMA. 2020;323(11):10619.
7. Chu DKW, Pan Y, Cheng SMS, Hui KPY, Krishnan P, Liu Y, et al. Molecular
diagnosis of a novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) causing an outbreak of
pneumonia. Clin Chem. 2020;66(4):54955.
8. Corman VM, Landt O, Kaiser M, Molenkamp R, Meijer A, Chu DK, et al.
Detection of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) by real-time RT-PCR. Euro
9. Wu Y, Guo C, Tang L, Hong Z, Zhou J, Dong X, et al. Prolonged presence of
SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA in faecal samples. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2020;
10. Xu Y, Li X, Zhu B, Liang H, Fang C, Gong Y, et al. Characteristics of pediatric
SARS-CoV-2 infection and potential evidence for persistent fecal viral
shedding. Nat Med. 2020;26(4):5025.
11. Cheung KS, Hung IF, Chan PP, Lung KC, Tso E, Liu R, et al. Gastrointestinal
manifestations of SARS-CoV-2 infection and virus load in fecal samples from
