Oral Pathology
COVID-19 pandemic and the impact
on dental education: discussing current
and future perspectives
Renato Assis MACHADO(a)
Paulo Rogrio Ferreti BONAN(b)
Danyel Elias da Cruz PEREZ(c)
Herclio MARTELLI JNIOR(d)
and instructors are rethinking the way they teach and interact
with students. New perspectives regarding a change in face-to-face
activities, social isolation and the reformulation of clinical activities
result in a transition toward e-learning and e-teaching processes. In this
with virtual teaching and learning, searching for available tools and
techniques as well as new perspectives.
Universidade de So Paulo  USP, Hospital
for Rehabilitation of Craniofacial Anomalies,
Bauru, SP, Brazil.
Universidade Federal da Paraba  UFPB,
Health Science Centre, Joo Pessoa,
PB, Brazil.
Keywords: Coronavirus; Education, Dental; Dentistry.
Universidade Federal de Pernambuco 
Clinical and Preventive Dentistry, Recife,
PE, Brazil.
Universidade Estadual de Montes Claros 
Unimontes, Health Sciences Postgraduate
Program, Montes Claros, MG, Brazil.
associative interest that represents a conflict
Renato Assis Machado
Submitted: May 5, 2020
Last revision: June 16, 2020
Amid the confinement due to the COVID-19 pandemic, face-to-face
classroom educational activities with undergraduate and postgraduate
dentistry students were nearly interrupted worldwide. Educators are
scrambling to adapt to social distancing (self-quarantine). The durations
alternatives are being used to continue teaching activities. For instance,
home and to provide remote courses and examinations, as requirements
for a successful graduation were rebuilt.1 Moreover, new perceptions
are incorporated into this new scenario, including students wellbeing,
feelings of loneliness, and familiar losses.1 In a recent survey focusing on
in organizing virtual meetings and, less frequently, small-scale working
United States, few recommendations were made on social distancing to
protect students, faculty, staff, and patients, and on how to follow dental
education.3 At this point, we have no precise information about Brazilian
susceptible to infections, including COVID-19, due to poorer knowledge
and insufficient infection prevention.4
Well-known platforms such as email, Google  educational tools,
Skype, Facebook, Instagram, YouTube, WhatsApp, and Telegram are
Braz. Oral Res. 2020;34:e083
COVID-19 pandemic and the impact on dental education: discussing current and future perspectives
intensively used worldwide for theoretical contents,
and are now adapting to this new purpose.5,6,7,8,9,10
Other platforms, such as LinkedIn and Pinterest,
can also be used. New forms of classroom conference
and lectures, using videoconference systems like
Zoom, Jitsi, Microsoft Teams, and WebEx were
implemented at many institutions.11,12,13,14 Other
institutions advocate the use of personal platforms
such as Moodle to spread educational contents and
to improve the communication between students
and professors.
Despite these new adaptations focusing on
educational matters, there is little evidence regarding
the actual impact of these media platforms on student
formation and knowledge solidification. Studies have
highlighted successful experiences, albeit in isolated
dental specialties.15 Moreover, when preclinical and
clinical training are considered, available options
are scarce. To comprehend this new reality and
suggest new approaches to critical areas of e-learning
and e-teaching in Dentistry, we aimed to critically
discuss the current and future perspectives for dental
education in the COVID-19 era.
Electronic platforms for theoretical
education during the COVID-19 era
The COVID-19 crisis revealed that we have
underestimated the role of the e-oral health
infrastructure, and education and services issues,
including teledentistry, which is incipient, albeit
promissory.1 Electronic platforms, video conferencing
networks and social media are being used for
theoretical purposes. 5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15 Educational
electronic platforms are presented by educational
institutions as an official alternative for nonclassroom activities. For example, Moodle platforms
promoting blended-learning to enhance student
training and improve their achievements, in line
with international standards.17 On Moodle , it is
possible to send didactic material, post videos, conduct
forum discussions, tasks, assessments, and organize
personal communication with students. Focusing
Braz. Oral Res. 2020;34:e083
Moodle provided otherwise unavailable formative
e-assessments and accommodated various question
formats, and different skill levels taught by instructors.
Generally, students were found to have positive
impressions despite technical problems and related
stresses.18 While these platforms are advantageous
because they are already structured and universal,
they require improvements, constant maintenance,
and a quality internet connection.
Open and paid platforms, such as Zoom, Jitsi
or WebEx, are interesting alternatives to classroom
settings, although they depend on a quality internet
connection. An interesting study,19 on ProblemBased Learning using WebEx  revealed some
issues with student distraction (phones and web
browsing). Virtual facilitation required vigilance from
facilitators and, sometimes, intervention. Students
had a satisfactory assimilation and memorization.
Assessments made by virtual platforms were not
altered significantly, and facilitators easily acclimated
to this new learning method. Although using physical
means in face-to-face education is a more effective
communication modality for clinical case-based
discussions; remote, internet-based discussions on
virtual platforms enable a more relaxed discussion
ambience. However, their effectiveness depends
upon a robust and ergonomic interface, involving
some prior training.11 The Zoom platform, for
instance, could be associated with other tools such
as Twitter with satisfying results in small-group
formats, engendering robust discussions and sparing
unnecessary commutating during social isolation
and even social restrictions over student gatherings.14
At this point, the discussion on new contents and
educational approaches could be unified, as for
phone applications, which keep students updated
with the latest information about infectious diseases
and prevention.4 Other commonly used learning
platforms are Microsoft Teams and Google Meet as
well as its additional resources, Google Classroom
and Hangout . Google Meet  allows live activities
with up to 250 simultaneous participants, with the
possibility of sharing the presenters screen (teacher
or student), allowing various didactic actions. In
Machado RA, Bonan RRF, Perez DEC, Martelli Jnior H
addition, with the consent of all participants, the
activity can be recorded and stored in Google
Drive or Google Classroom, for later reference.
In remote activities, the privacy of user data is
crucial. Tools using end-to-end encrypted systems,
of which only the users can read the message,
are recommended. These systems ensure secure
information, without interference from external
manufacturers and servers.20
Social media platforms, including Instagram,
Facebook, WhatsApp, Telegram, and YouTube are
widely used as teaching alternatives. WhatsApp s
usefulness as a tool for telepathology was evaluated,
and provided satisfying responses to efficient
screening, identifying suspicious lesions and
a letter highlighting the importance of WhatsApp
as a communication and counseling tool during
the COVID-19 crisis, focusing on oral diagnoses.7
A comparison between the reception and response
times of WhatsApp  and traditional electronic
email, within the dental educational environment,
showed that better results are achieved using instant
multimedia messaging.10 Facebook allows students
to discuss topics more openly and flexibly, with less
rigid time and place constraints. It could be useful in
teaching the theoretical aspects of medical emergencies
in dental practice.6
Although these social media platforms are
universal, the students may be distracted by low
quality content. Recently we have demonstrated that
the available content on oral cancer on this social
media is of poor quality, considering various types
of available media.1 There is also no quality filter, and
all types of content can be accessed. Other questions
dwell on policies and legal issues, which academic
dental institutions need to consider as they develop
effective social media policies, including compliance
perspectives and providing the needed resources.8
As an alternative to institutional digital electronic
platforms, we have used YouTube, Instagram, and
WhatsApp as an open regional information network.
From the content generated by teachers and researchers
from various member institutions, we have been
via WhatsApp. We have had an especially helpful
experience through a Live broadcasted on YouTube
For this event, we gathered over a hundred
professors, practitioners, and students from different
Brazilian regions, to discuss topics on oral cancer and
oncologic treatment side effects. Conversely, apps for
mobile devices can be developed and remotely used,
enabling interaction, including between teachers and
students, as well as for content to be shared. These
apps would enable interactions through conventional
social media, and provide highly reliable content.
Recently, we highlighted the possibility for health
professionals and patients to interact through apps
or social media amid the pandemic, which could
also be applied to professor-student interactions.7
Preclinical and clinical e-learning activities
during the COVID-19 era
Together, these devices are being used to teach
theoretical content. However, another concern is the
interruption of education on laboratorial, preclinical,
and clinical activities. How can students receive
their theoretical-practical training without teaching
preclinical or clinical activities face to face? For
to modify their assessment schedule or extend program
dates, particularly regarding clinical hours, rather
than reducing the clinical graduation requirements.2
we should rethink and remodel our infrastructure
offer, and manage occupational hazards, focusing
on the safety of our students, staff, and patients.1 As
this situation could last, we should find alternatives
to keep training our students until dental practice
can resume.
simulation with dental training manikins is
extremely difficult. Although different clinical dental
care simulators have been developed and yielded
satisfying results,21,22 they are scarce in educational
of dentistry, and are very expensive. Conversely,
other virtual models could be used more widely. For
instance, positive experiences have been reported
with virtual slides using whole-slide image for oral
Braz. Oral Res. 2020;34:e083
COVID-19 pandemic and the impact on dental education: discussing current and future perspectives
pathology education, with superior results than with
the traditional approach (conventional microscopy).23
glass slide, producing a high-resolution digital slide
(whole-slide imaging), which enables the analysis
and study of the slide in specific programs, according
to the digitization system.24 Usually, the software
used in analysis is freely accessible. The wholeslide imaging can be stored on the institutions own
drives or servers. Thus, the files can be accessed
by teachers and students, including being shared
on learning platforms during live performances.
Despite the automatic digital slide scanner being
equipment and use whole-slide imaging during
oral pathology education.
Case-based discussions are an important learning
strategy, applied in several dental specialties and
courses. Virtual patient (VP)-based learning consists
of simulating clinical cases to improve students
skills in decision making and diagnosis. Recently,
a web-based VP training study on herpes simplex
infection and recurrent aphthous stomatitis found
an improved learning in dental students. 25 The
learning platforms can also offer the possibility of
case-based discussions. Besides chat discussion,
live discussions are allowed, as well as sharing
clinical, imaging and/or histopathological images.
In such activities, the protection of patients data,
including images and demographic data, is essential.
End-to-end encrypted systems are indispensable.
In addition, many countries data protection rights
do not allow patient data to be transmitted to foreign
servers.20 Case-based discussions can be also achieved
using social media, such as Instagram, Facebook,
YouTube, Twitter, LinkedIn and Pinterest .
Another example is the use of a mobile app
containing reference images, which was found
to improve the students ability to diagnose
endodontic complications with excellent results.26
For prosthodontics, an app could effectively improve
clinical reasoning skills for planning prosthodontic
rehabilitation.27 However, we have, at this point, very
few options available for our students. We strongly
suggest these new options and the joint development
of apps with computational teams focusing on complex
Braz. Oral Res. 2020;34:e083
scenarios such as theoretical, preclinical and clinical
practices. Nevertheless, regarding teaching activities
can replace experience with patients. In addition,
in Brazil, mandatory curricular internships in the
public service are also suspended.
Care for staff members, professors,
technicians, and students
Different degrees of proximity to COVID-19,
the need for social distancing and isolation, and
uncertainties about the outcome of the pandemic
can significantly affect staff members and students
mental health. For students, concern about the delay
in completing graduation is an additional issue,
especially for final-year students. This context can
cause anxiety, poor sleep or short sleep durations,
predisposing people to depression and post-traumatic
stress disorders.28 Mental health disorders negatively
impact learning and academic achievement.29 Thus,
the monitoring of staff members and students by
the direction of college is important. Even in a
period of uncertainty, holding regular meetings,
especially with students, can reassure them and
help decrease anxiety.
Although there are no official data on teaching
COVID-19 pandemic, the sudden interruption of
emergency e-learning plan. Particularly in Brazil,
most dental professors are untrained to perform
remote learning. In addition to the need for adequate
training, the sudden inception of e-learning can
further increase anxiety. It should also be considered
that the sudden start of e-learning can be a stressor
for students, considering that not everyone will
adequately adapt to this teaching modality. The
to keep staff and students motivated.
The COVID-19 pandemic has a significant economic
impact, with an increased worldwide unemployment
about-the-ilo/newsroom/news/WCMS_738742/lang-en/index.htm) where, with the adoption of social
students are low-income, with a family income per
Machado RA, Bonan RRF, Perez DEC, Martelli Jnior H
capita of up to 1.5 minimum wages (minimum wage:
There are also low-income students in private dental
this context and the high financial cost of dentistry
course, many students need a job to achieve their
goals. Thus, considering the ongoing critical pandemic
crisis, it is reasonable to hypothesize an increase in
dropout rates in dentistry courses in Brazil. This
aspect must also be carefully considered by higher
education institutions administrations, both public
and private.
Future perspectives
Considering our new reality, it is possible to
continue teaching theoretical content, keeping
students unequal access to quality internet in
mind, especially those with low income. However,
few effective alternatives are available to dental
students today, considering pre-clinical and clinical
access restrictions to academic buildings, and
planned to provide or were already providing
Additionally, dentistry will have to ensure a greater
convergence with medicine.4 We should rethink our
curriculum and our way of delivering classes and
lectures in adequation with this new reality.3,16,19 The
COVID-19 pandemic highlights a need for further
research in this area, to educate our students more
comprehensively. Our educational councils should be
stimulated to formulate institutional policies which
generate new options for students and professors in
this new reality. Finally, the challenges will be greater
in developing countries. Unequal student access
to quality internet can compromise achievement
in remote activities. To return to clinical activities,
clinics, to adapt to the new biosafety reality of the
post-pandemic period.
1. Emami E. COVID-19: Perspective of a dean of dentistry. JDR Clin Trans Res. 2020 May;5(3):211-3.
2. Quinn B, Field J, Gorter R, Akota I, Manzanares MC, Paganelli C, et al. COVID-19: The immediate response of
European Academic Dental Institutions and future implications for dental education. Eur J Dent Educ. 2020 May;eje.12542.
3. Iyer P, Aziz K, Ojcius DM. Impact of COVID-19 on dental education in the United States. J Dent Educ. 2020 Jun;84(6):718-22.
5. Passos KK, Leonel AC, Bonan PR, Castro JF, Pontual ML, Ramos-Perez FM, et al. Quality of information about oral cancer in
Brazilian Portuguese available on Google, Youtube, and Instagram. Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal. 2020 May;25(3):e346-52.
6. Alshiekhly U, Arrar R, Barngkgei I, Dashash M. Facebook as a learning environment for teaching medical emergencies in dental practice.
7. Machado RA, Souza NL, Oliveira RM, Martelli Jnior H, Bonan PR. Social media and telemedicine for oral diagnosis and counselling in
8. Spallek H, Turner SP, Donate-Bartfield E, Chambers D, McAndrew M, Zarkowski P, et al. Social media in the dental
9. Das R, Manaktala N, Bhatia T, Agarwal S, Natarajan S, Lewis AJ, et al. Efficiency of mobile video sharing application (WhatsApp) in
10. Poblete P, Nieto E. Does time matter? WhatsApp vs electronic mail for dental education. A pilot study. Eur J Dent Educ.
Braz. Oral Res. 2020;34:e083
COVID-19 pandemic and the impact on dental education: discussing current and future perspectives
11. Martin N, Lazalde OM, Stokes C, Romano D. An evaluation of remote communication versus face-to-face in clinical dental education.
12. Klein KP, Hannum WM, Koroluk LD, Proffit WR. Interactive distance learning for orthodontic residents: utilization and acceptability. Am J
13. Wootton AR, McCuistian C, Legnitto Packard DA, Gruber VA, Saberi P. Overcoming technological challenges: lessons learned from a
14. Halpin PA, Lockwood MK. The use of Twitter and Zoom videoconferencing in healthcare professions seminar course benefits students at
15. Santos GN, Leite AF, Figueiredo PT, Pimentel NM, Flores-Mir C, Melo NS, et al. Effectiveness of e-learning in oral radiology education: a
education and research. J Pak Med Assoc. 2018 Jul;68(7):1076-8.
19. Haley CM, Brown B. Adapting problem-based learning curricula to a virtual environment. J Dent Educ. 2020 May.
20. Pontual ML, Nascimento EH, Cruz Perez DE, Pontual AA, Ramos-Perez FM. Challenges in oral radiology teaching during
22. Buchanan JA. Experience with virtual reality-based technology in teaching restorative dental procedures. J Dent Educ.
23. Fernandes CIR, Bonan RF, Bonan PRF, Leonel ACLS, Carvalho EJA, Castro JFL, et al. Dental students perceptions and performance in
25. Mardani M, Cheraghian S, Naeeni SK, Zarifsanaiey N. Effectiveness of virtual patients in teaching clinical decision-making skills to
26. Oliveira ML, Verner FS, Kamburoglu K, Silva JN, Junqueira RB. Effectiveness of using a mobile app to improve dental
students ability to identify endodontic complications from periapical radiographs. J Dent Educ. 2019 Sep;83(9):1092-9.
27. Deshpande S, Chahande J, Rathi A. Mobile learning app: a novel method to teach clinical decision making in prosthodontics. Educ
28. Tang W, Hu T, Hu B, Jin C, Wang G, Xie C, et al. Prevalence and correlates of PTSD and depressive symptoms one month after the
29. Arajo FJ, Lima LS, Cidade PI, Nobre CB, Rolim Neto ML. Impact of Sars-Cov-2 and its reverberation in global higher education and
Braz. Oral Res. 2020;34:e083
