COPYRIGHT 2020  BY THE ARCHIVES OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY
CASE REPORT
Association of New Coronavirus Disease with Fragility
Hip and Lower Limb Fractures in Elderly Patients
Mohammad Javad Shariyate, MD1; Amir R. Kachooei, MD2
The novel coronavirus-induced infection (COVID-19) was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization on
March 11, 2020. Iran is one of the countries with a high incidence of COVID-19 infection.
Data on three patients with fragility hip fracture and COVID-19 infection were collected from one hospital located in
Badrud, Isfahan, Iran, from March 1, 2010, to March 30, 2020. All patients were elderly and had fracture induced by fall
from standing height.
All patients (n=3) were admitted with fragility hip fracture due to low energy trauma. The most common symptoms were
weakness and fatigue. Positive C-reactive protein (CRP) and Leukopenia were the most common abnormal laboratory
evaluations. According to the results, two patients underwent surgical treatment, and one patient had negative reverse
transcription-CRP; however, all of them underwent medical treatment for COVID-19 infection.
There is a possible relationship between COVID-19 infection and fragility hip fracture in elderly patients. It could be
induced by fatigue and weakness due to COVID-19 disease. COVOID-19 infection should be considered in elderly
patients with fragility hip fracture during the coronavirus pandemic.
Level of evidence: IV
Keywords: Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), Fracture, Hip
n December 2019, an outbreak of pneumonia of
unknown origin developed in Wuhan of Hubei
Province, China (1). By January 7, 2020, Chinese
scientists confirmed that the outbreak was caused by a
novel coronavirus, initially referred to as the 2019-nCoV
(2). The disease is now termed as coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) by the WHO.
It is now evident that most cases of COVID-19 develop
mild respiratory and constitutional symptoms (3) while
some patients might remain asymptomatic (3,4). The
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RTPCR) has a fair detection rate of 30% to 60% at initial
presentation with several other limitations (5). In a
recent report from China, chest CT scan had a sensitivity
of 97% for diagnosing COVID-19 which is superior to
RT-PCR (6). Irans ministry of health introduced a RT-
PCR as a gold standard for the diagnosis of COVID-19,
because it is available and cheaper in Iran which is
more positive early in the course of the disease and can
be used as a screening tool with higher sensitivity than
In Iran, the first cases of COVID-19 were officially
reported between February 19 and 23, 2020 and it soon
became clear that Iran is one of the countries that is
worst-hit by COVID-19 outbreak (7, 8).
Badrood General Hospital in Badrood city near Kashan
and Qom - the epicenters of Iran  is covering 30,000
population where we diagnosed 59 patients with a
positive RT-PCR and more than 70 patients were treated
based on highly suspected chest CT scan until March
2, 2020,. This number represents a high prevalence of
Arch Bone Jt Surg. 2020; 8 (Supplement 1): 297-301. Doi: 10.22038/abjs.2020.47626.2333
THE ARCHIVES OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY. ABJS.MUMS.AC.IR
VOLUME 8. SUPPLEMENT 1. APRIL 2020
of our hospital between January 2018 until January 2020,
we found only 17 patients admitted with the diagnosis
of fragility hip fracture (approximately 0.7 patients a
month). Notably only over a month in March 2020, we
admitted 3 elderly patients with fragility hip fracture all
of whom were diagnosed positive for COVID-19 based on
chest CT scan study.
Case presentation
The patient was 73 year old male admitted with
preoperative laboratory exam did not show any
abnormality. However, he was complaining of a recent
generalized weakness. He underwent surgical fixation
under spinal anesthesia and intravenous sedation. His
FRAGILE HIP FRACTURE AND CORONAVIRUS
oxygen saturation dropped to 90% during surgery
which raised to 96% with face mask and O2 supplement.
He was transferred to post anesthesia care unit (PACU)
and was discharged from the hospital after 2 days. He
returned to the hospital 3 days after discharge with
new onset fever, weakness, dyspnea, and anorexia.
Initial evaluation ruled out surgical site infection while
the chest X-ray was suggestive of COVID-19 leading to
showed positive CRP and elevated liver function tests
including AST, ALT, and LDH. Complete blood count (CBC)
demonstrated 7.7109 white blood cells/L with 81%
neutrophils and 13% lymphocytes illustrating significant
lymphocytopenia. Moreoevr, chest HRCT was diagnostic
predictive value of the findings, PCR was considered false
THE ARCHIVES OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY. ABJS.MUMS.AC.IR
VOLUME 8. SUPPLEMENT 1. APRIL 2020
FRAGILE HIP FRACTURE AND CORONAVIRUS
from stand height leve.
negative and patient was planned to receive treatment
per protocol.
The patient was a 69 year old male admitted with
our experience with patient 1, we carefully evaluated
the patient. He had no fever and no cough but he was
complaining of weakness. The chest CT scan was
lymphocytopenia (0.6109cells/L) was present while
other laboratory studies were in a normal range. The
patients were treated in a same manner as was done for
The patient was a 93 year old female admitted with
showed a low grade fever along with cough and feeling of
fatigue. Primary laboratory study revealed leukocytosis
(1.1109 cells/L) with 8% lymphocyte count (significant
lymphopenia). A second CBC after 2 days showed 5.5109
white blood cell/L consisting of 13% lymphocyte. In
addition, CRP and LDH were 55 and 472, respectively
while other laboratory studies were in a normal range.
and the subsequent chest CT scan was diagnostic for
urged to postpone surgery due to severe pulmonary
THE ARCHIVES OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY. ABJS.MUMS.AC.IR
VOLUME 8. SUPPLEMENT 1. APRIL 2020
All three patients received oseltamivir and
hydroxychloroquine. One patient also received
corticosteroid. At the time of preparing this paper, all
three patients are still hospitalized and is in the ICU.
To our knowledge, there are only two reports about
the possible association between COVID-19 and trauma
in the recent literature. The first was reported by
Khazaei et al (9). He reported incidental diagnosis of
COVID-19 in trauma patients with which he raised the
possible association between provisional COVID-19
infection and traumatic events. They did not mention
fragility fractures in specific, but they reported falling
and car accident as the most frequent mechanisms of
injury. Interestingly, most of the patient did not have any
symptoms related to COVID-19 at presentation. Second
study reported by bobin et al reported 10 patients
with COVID-19 infection after sustaining a traumatic
fracture in a motor-vehicle accident (10). Of these, 3
patients were negative on RT-PCR exam, but all showed
diagnostic features on chest CT scan. They concluded
that presentation of symptoms was not different from
other COVID-19 patients and was unrelated to having
a fracture. They also concluded that lymphopenia was
more likely to be found in patients with a fracture.
The observations could be just a coincidence, but
there is a possible relationship between COVID-19
infection and fragility fractures as a result of a fall from
a standing due to weakness and fatigue arising from the
underlying disease. In our case study, the most common
chief complaint was weakness and fatigue.
FRAGILE HIP FRACTURE AND CORONAVIRUS
Based on the related algorithm described by British
Orthopedic Association for the management of
orthopedic patients during coronavirus pandemic,
the care of patients with lower limb fragility fractures
remain urgent and is a surgical priority which
highlights the importance of vigility in this group of
Most patients with fragility lower extremity fractures
are old and have other underlying conditions such as
hypertension, diabetes, and heart disease, which leads
to a lengthy hospital stay as well as requiring PACU,
both increasing the chance of transmitting infection
to the health care workers and other patients (12). On
the other hand, the higher death rate was primarily in
elderly people, possibly due to a weaker immune system
that permits faster progression of viral infection (13,
14). Additionally, the stress associated with the fracture
and the surgery itself can trigger a series of oxidative
stress responses and excessive inflammation making
them vulnerable to more severe course of infection
(15). So, it is advised to carefully evaluate the elderly
patients with fragility lower extremity fracture during
an outbreak of COVID-19 in order to protect the health
and safety of the health care workers.
World Health Organization (WHO) guideline has
instructed airway management of confirmed or
suspected COVID-19 patients to reduce the risk of
viral transmission (16). Nevertheless, to avoid any
airway manipulation, the use of regional anesthesia
(RA) techniques are preferred when possible (17).
The main advantage would be the avoidance of
airway instrumentation and patient coughing during
intubation and extubation, which reduces the risk of
direct contact with generated aerosols and dispersion
During a pandemic, it is suggested to consider everyone
a COVID-19 positive to take enough precautions when
treating a patient. However, elderly patients with fragile
lower extremity fractures are those who potentially
pose a greater risk to the health care workers. We
suggest being vigilant when seeing the patients and use
sufficient personal protective equipment (PPE) when
interacting. Careful assessment using chest CT scan
and other lab tests are recommended during pandemic
regardless of having any symptoms to diagnose and
separate the COVID-19 patient as soon as possible.
Mohammad Javad Shariyate MD1
Amir R. Kachooei MD2
Isfahan, Iran
Sciences, Mashhad, Iran
THE ARCHIVES OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY. ABJS.MUMS.AC.IR
VOLUME 8. SUPPLEMENT 1. APRIL 2020
FRAGILE HIP FRACTURE AND CORONAVIRUS
1. Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, et al. Clinical features of patients
infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan,
China. Lancet 2020; 395: 497e506
2. Zhu N, Zhang D, Wang W, et al. A novel coronavirus
from patients with pneumonia in China, 2019. N
3. Wu Z, McGoogan JM. Characteristics of and important
lessons from the coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) outbreak in China: summary of a report
of 72 314 cases from the Chinese Center for Disease
Control and Preven- tion. Jama. 2020
characteristics of 24 asymptomatic infections with
COVID-19 screened among close contacts in Nanjing,
China. Science China Life Sciences. 2020:1-6.
5. Yang Y, Yang M, Shen C, Wang F, Yuan J, Li J, et al.
Laboratory diagnosis and monitoring the viral
6. Ai T, Yang Z, Hou H, Zhan C, Chen C, Lv W, et al.
Correlation of chest CT and RT-PCR testing in
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in China: A
7. MahdaviA, KhaliliN, DavarpanahAH, FaghihiT,
Mahdavi A, Haseli S, et al. Radiologic Management
of COVID-19: Preliminary Experience of the Iranian
Society of Radiology COVID-19 Consultant Group
8. National Committee on COVID-19 Epidemiology. Daily
Situation Report on Coronavirus disease (COVID19)
in Iran; March 13, 2020. Archives of Academic
Emergency Medicine. 2020;8(1):e23.
9. Khazaei M, Asgari R, Zarei E, Moharramzad Y,
Haghighatkhah H, Sanei Taheri M. Incidentally
Diagnosed COVID-19 In- fection in Trauma Patients;
a Clinical Experience. Arch Acad Emerg Med. 2020;
10. Bobin Mi, Lang Chen, Yuan Xiong, Hang Xue, Wu Zhou,
and Guohui Liu, Characteristics and Early Prognosis
of COVID-19 Infection in Fracture Patients, J Bone
Joint Surg Am. 2020;00:1-9
11. British Orthopedic Association, BOAST - Management
of patients with urgent orthopaedic conditions and
trauma during the coronavirus pandemic. Available
12. HIP ATTACK Investigators. Accelerated surgery
versus standard care in hip fracture (HIP ATTACK):
an international, randomised, controlled trial. Lancet.
13. W. Wang, J. Tang, F. Wei, Updated understanding of the
outbreak of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in
Wuhan, China, J. Med. Virol. 92 (4) (2020) 441447,
14. Q. Li, X. Guan, P. Wu, X. Wang, L. Zhou, Y. Tong, et al.,
Early transmission dynamics in wuhan, China, of
novel coronavirus-infected pneumonia, N. Engl. J. Med.
15. Mazidi M, Shivappa N, Wirth MD, Hebert JR,
Vatanparast H, Kengne AP. The association between
dietary inflammatory properties and bone mineral
density and risk of fracture in US adults. Eur J Clin
16. World Health Organization. Coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) technical guidance: infection prevention
novelcoronavirus-2019/technical-guidance/infectionprevention- and-control (accessed March 2020).
17. Peng PW, Ho PL, Hota SS. Outbreak of a new
coronavirus: what anaesthetists should know. British
18. Tan TK. How severe acute respiratory syndrome
(SARS) affected the Department of Anaesthesia
at Singapore General Hospital. Anaesthesia and
intensive care. 2004 Jun;32(3):394-400.
