Diagnostic accuracy of serological tests for covid-19: systematic
Mayara Lisboa Bastos,1,2 Gamuchirai Tavaziva,1 Syed Kunal Abidi,1 Jonathon R Campbell,1,6
Louis-Patrick Haraoui,3 James C Johnston,4 Zhiyi Lan,1 Stephanie Law,5 Emily MacLean,6
Anete Trajman,1,2 Dick Menzies,1,6 Andrea Benedetti,1,6 Faiz Ahmad Khan1,6
Respiratory Epidemiology and
Clinical Research Unit, Centre
for Outcomes Research and
Centre, Montreal, Canada
de Janeiro, Brazil
Department of Microbiology
and Infectious Diseases, Faculty
of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Universit de Sherbrooke,
Sherbrooke, Qubec, Canada
Vancouver, Canada
Department of Global Health
and Social Medicine, Harvard
Departments of Epidemiology,
Biostatistics and Occupational
Health, and Medicine, McGill
Correspondence to:
F Ahmad Khan
Cite this as: BMJ2020;370:m2516
To determine the diagnostic accuracy of serological
tests for coronavirus disease-2019 (covid-19).
Data sources
Medline, bioRxiv, and medRxiv from 1 January to 30
April 2020, using subject headings or subheadings
combined with text words for the concepts of covid-19
and serological tests for covid-19.
Eligibility criteria and data analysis
Eligible studies measured sensitivity or specificity,
or both of a covid-19 serological test compared
with a reference standard of viral culture or reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. Studies were
excluded with fewer than five participants or samples.
Risk of bias was assessed using quality assessment
of diagnostic accuracy studies 2 (QUADAS-2). Pooled
sensitivity and specificity were estimated using
random effects bivariate meta-analyses.
Main outcome measures
The primary outcome was overall sensitivity and
specificity, stratified by method of serological
testing (enzyme linked immunosorbent assays
(ELISAs), lateral flow immunoassays (LFIAs), or
chemiluminescent immunoassays (CLIAs)) and
immunoglobulin class (IgG, IgM, or both). Secondary
outcomes were stratum specific sensitivity and
specificity within subgroups defined by study or
What is already known on this topic
Serological tests to detect antibodies against severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) could improve diagnosis of coronavirus disease
2019 (covid-19) and be useful tools for epidemiological surveillance
The number of serological tests has rapidly increased, and many are being
marketed for point-of-care use
The evidence base supporting the diagnostic accuracy of these tests, however,
has not been formally evaluated
What this study adds
The available evidence on the accuracy of serological tests for covid-19 is
characterised by risks of bias and heterogeneity, and as such, estimates of
sensitivity and specificity are unreliable and have limited generalisability
Evidence is particularly weak for point-of-care serological tests
Caution is warranted if using serological tests for covid-19 for clinical decision
making or epidemiological surveillance
Current evidence does not support the continued use of existing point-of-care
participant characteristics, including time since
symptom onset.
5016 references were identified and 40 studies
included. 49 risk of bias assessments were carried
out (one for each population and method evaluated).
High risk of patient selection bias was found in 98%
(48/49) of assessments and high or unclear risk
of bias from performance or interpretation of the
serological test in 73% (36/49). Only 10% (4/40)
of studies included outpatients. Only two studies
evaluated tests at the point of care. For each method
of testing, pooled sensitivity and specificity were not
associated with the immunoglobulin class measured.
The pooled sensitivity of ELISAs measuring IgG or
IgM was 84.3% (95% confidence interval 75.6%
to 90.9%), of LFIAs was 66.0% (49.3% to 79.3%),
and of CLIAs was 97.8% (46.2% to 100%). In all
analyses, pooled sensitivity was lower for LFIAs, the
potential point-of-care method. Pooled specificities
ranged from 96.6% to 99.7%. Of the samples used
for estimating specificity, 83% (10 465/12 547) were
from populations tested before the epidemic or not
suspected of having covid-19. Among LFIAs, pooled
(88.2%, 83.6% to 91.3%). Heterogeneity was seen
in all analyses. Sensitivity was higher at least three
weeks after symptom onset (ranging from 69.9% to
98.9%) compared with within the first week (from
Higher quality clinical studies assessing the
diagnostic accuracy of serological tests for covid-19
are urgently needed. Currently, available evidence
does not support the continued use of existing pointof-care serological tests.
Study registration
PROSPERO CRD42020179452.
Accurate and rapid diagnostic tests will be critical
for achieving control of coronavirus disease 2019
(covid-19), a pandemic illness caused by severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARSCoV-2). Diagnostic tests for covid-19 fall into two
main categories: molecular tests that detect viral RNA,
and serological tests that detect anti-SARS-CoV-2
immunoglobulins. Reverse transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR), a molecular test, is widely
used as the reference standard for diagnosis of
covid-19; however, limitations include potential false
negative results,1 2 changes in diagnostic accuracy
over the disease course,3 and precarious availability
of test materials.4 Serological tests have generated
substantial interest as an alternative or complement
to RT-PCR in the diagnosis of acute infection, as some
might be cheaper and easier to implement at the point
of care. A clear advantage of these tests over RT-PCR is
that they can identify individuals previously infected
by SARS-CoV-2, even if they never underwent testing
while acutely ill. As such, serological tests could be
deployed as surveillance tools to better understand the
epidemiology of SARS-CoV-2 and potentially inform
individual risk of future disease.
Many serological tests for covid-19 have become
available in a short period, including some marketed for
use as rapid, point-of-care tests. The pace of development
has, however, exceeded that of rigorous evaluation, and
important uncertainty about test accuracy remains.5
to assess the diagnostic accuracy of serological tests for
SARS-CoV-2 infection. Our objectives were to evaluate
the quality of the available evidence, to compare pooled
sensitivities and specificities of different test methods,
and to identify study, test, and patient characteristics
associated with test accuracy.
Search strategy and selection criteria
according to the preferred reporting items for systematic
(see supplementary file). We searched Ovid-Medline
Covid-19 antibody testing
Visual Abstract
Current evidence does not support the continued use of existing
point-of-care covid- serology tests with the LFIA method.
Only two studies evaluated performance at the point of care
Study design
Data sources
Sensitivity estimated
from people with
confirmed covid-
Specificity estimated mostly
using pre-epidemic samples,
or low risk individuals
More than one sample may have
originated from the same participant
Enzyme Linked
Lateral Flow
TRUE result
Under % prevalence
FALSE result
Patients with
Patients without
Evidence quality
Evidence about the diagnostic accuracy of covid- serology tests
is characterised by high risks of bias, heterogeneity, and limited
generalisability to point-of-care testing and to outpatient populations
Diagnostic accuracy of three serological tests
on language. Subject headings/subheadings (when
applicable) combined with text words were used
for the concepts of covid-19 (or SARS-CoV-2) and
serological tests. The supplementary file provides
the complete search strategy, run on 6 April 2020
list of covid-19 preprints from medRxiv and bioRxiv
initially on 4 April 2020, and again on 28 April 2020.
identified in references of included studies.
Eligible studies were randomised trials, cohort or
case-control studies, and case series, reporting the
sensitivity or specificity, or both of a serological test
with sample sizes less than five, and studies that
only reported analytical sensitivity (ie, dilutional
identification of detection limits).7 Three investigators
(MB, GT, FAK) independently screened titles and
abstracts, and two (MB, GT) independently screened
full text papers. We used a sensitive screening strategy
at the title or abstract level wherein selection by a
included studies when sensitivity or specificity, or both
of at least one covid-19 serological test was measured
against a reference standard of viral culture or RT-PCR.
Data analysis
In our primary analysis, we estimated pooled sensitivity
and specificity by method of serological test. We
expected that accuracy would be associated with the
immunoglobulin class being measured, as is the case
for other coronaviruses.8-10 As such, we stratified the
primary results by class of immunoglobulin detected.
One investigator (MB) extracted aggregate study
level data using a piloted standardised electronic
(ZL or EM) verified all entered data. No duplicate data
were identified. We collected information on study
characteristics (location, design), study populations
(age, sex, clinical severity, sources of populations
used for estimating specificity), the timing of specimen
collection in relation to onset of symptoms, and
methodological details about index and reference
tests. We categorised the tests by method: enzyme
linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs), lateral flow
immunoassays (LFIAs), or chemiluminescent immuno
assays (CLIAs). In several studies, investigators asses
sed the accuracy of more than one test method (eg,
ELISA and LFIA) or more than one particular index test
(eg, one study evaluated nine different LFIAs). For each
particular index test performed in a study, we extracted
the numbers needed to construct 22 contingency
considered its own study arm. For example, a study
that assessed nine LFIAs and two ELISAs on the same
set of patients would contribute 11 study arms.
and applicability concerns using the quality assessment
of diagnostic accuracy studies 2 (QUADAS-2) tool, for
the domains of patient selection, performance of the
index test, performance of the reference test, and flow
and timing (for risk of bias only).11 Conflicts were
resolved through consensus. We performed a quality
assessment for each test method and population. For
ELISAs on the same set of patients would have two
QUADAS-2 assessments (one for the LFIAs and one for
the ELISAs).
The main summary measures were pooled sensitivity
and pooled specificity, with 95% confidence intervals
estimated using bivariate generalised linear mixed
models. We specified random effects at the level of the
particular study and of the particular test. The study
level random effect accounted for correlation of results
that could arise from study level factors, such as using
the same set of samples to evaluate more than one test
in a study. The test level random effect was added to
account for differences arising from characteristics of
individual tests. When models with two random effects
did not converge, we used only the test level random
We first estimated pooled sensitivity and specificity by
test method (ELISA, LFIA, CLIA) and immunoglobulin
class detected (IgM or IgG, or both). Separately, we
reported results from studies evaluating serological
tests that measured IgA or total immunoglobulin levels
and without meta-analyses owing to small numbers.
To describe heterogeneity, we constructed summary
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves with
95% prediction regions, estimated using bivariate
meta-analysis with a test level random effect only, and
forest plots. As our models were bivariate, we did not
use the I2 statistic. Studies that did not report both
sensitivity and specificity were excluded from bivariate
To assess prespecified variables as potential deter
minants of diagnostic accuracy, we compared pooled
sensitivity and specificity across several subgroups
the level of patients or samples; the type of SARS-CoV-2
or an in-house assay; whether the population used
to estimate specificity consisted of samples collected
before the emergence of SARS CoV-2, individuals
without suspected covid-19 tested during the epidemic,
individuals with suspected covid-19, or individuals
with other viral infections; and the timing of sample
collection in relation to the onset of symptoms (during
the first week, during the second week, or after the
second week). In these analyses, to maximize sample
size we pooled data regardless of immunoglobulin class.
To do so, we used the combined IgG and IgM result when
available, otherwise we used the separate IgG and IgM
same test level and study level random effects. Because
data were not available to study the association between
the timing of sampling and specificity, this analysis was
Records identied through database searching
Records aer duplicates removed and abstracts screened
Records excluded
Additional records identied
through other sources
Studies not reporting accuracy
Reference tests either not used or not
viral culture or RT-PCR
Other diseases not covid-19
Inadequate results report
Index tests not relevant
Studies included (73 arms)
Fig 1 | Study selection. RT-PCR=reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction; covid-19=coronavirus disease 2019
Geographical location:
United Kingdom
United States
Clinical setting:
Inpatient only
Inpatient and outpatient
Not reported
Study design:
Time from symptom onset to index test:
 First week
Second week
Third week or later
Accuracy at level of patient or sample:
Population for estimating specificity:
Samples collected before
covid-19 epidemic
Samples collected during covid-19 epidemic in
individuals not suspected of having covid-19
Individuals with suspected covid-19 but RT-PCR negative result
Individuals with confirmed other viral infection**
Mix of above
No of
No of
No of
No of
No of
No of
No of
No of
ELISA=enzyme linked immunosorbent assay; LFIA=lateral flow immunoassay; CLIA=chemiluminescent immunoassay; RT-PCR=reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction.
*Includes enzyme immunoassay, fluorescence immunochromatographic assay, liquid phase immunoassay.
Cassaniti et al15 includes two distinct populations, patients who were triaged or admitted to hospital, with different study design (cohort and case-control). This study as two different cohorts,
hence sum of number of studies across LFIA rows is 18.
One study was poorly reported, and it was difficult to classify study design.
First week range: 0-7 days (one cohort with 0-10 days is counted in this group); second week: 7-14 days; third week: 15 days or more.
Patients could have contributed more than one sample, and analyses did not account for correlation.
Numbers include samples and patients. Some studies reported more than one type of population to access specificity.
Includes studies where timing was unclear.
**Includes some samples originating from before the covid-19 epidemic, and some during the epidemic, as further stratification was not possible.
done with univariate models and included studies that
only reported sensitivity.
We used the statistical software R12 package Lme413
for meta-analyses, and package mada to create sum
mary ROC curves.14
Patient and public involvement
Patients were not involved in the development of the
research question or its outcome measures, conduct of
records (4969 unique) were identified through data
searches. In total, 4696 records based on screening of
excluded. Forty studies totalling 73 study arms15-54 met
by test method; the sum of the number of studies
exceeds 40 because some evaluated more than one
method. Seventy per cent (28/40) of the studies were
from China,16-35 38-41 45-48 8% (3/40) from Italy,15 36 43
and the remainder from the United States (3/40),42 50 52
Denmark (1/40),51 Spain (1/40),37 Sweden (1/40),53
Japan (1/40),44 the United Kingdom (1/40),49 and
Germany (1/40).54 Both sensitivity and specificity were
reported in 80% (32/40) of the studies, sensitivity alone
case-control design for selecting the study population
and 10% (4/40) included outpatient populations.
Disease severity was reported in 40% (16/40) and
sensitivity stratified by time since symptom onset
was reported in 45% (18/40). Several studies used
samples rather than individual patients to estimate
accuracy. In these studies, one patient could have
contributed multiple samples for estimating sensitivity
or specificity, or both. Approaches to estimating
specificity included using specimens collected before
the emergence of covid-19; specimens collected during
the epidemic from individuals not suspected of having
covid-19, or specimens from individuals with covid-19
symptoms and a negative RT-PCR result for SARSCoV-2; or specimens from individuals with laboratory
confirmed infection with other viruses (respiratory
report the characteristics of each individual study.
(index) and reference tests that were used in the
details for each study. Most of the studies evaluated
immunoglobulin class and antigen target. Among 17
studies that evaluated potential point-of-care tests
(LFIAs), only two performed testing at the point of care.
Direct testing on whole blood specimensas would
be done at the point of carewas performed in 6/17
(35%) studies of LFIAs, and outcomes of such testing
Class of immunoglobulin measured by index test:
IgM and IgG
Total Ig
Antigen target of immunoglobulin measured by index test:
Surface protein
Nucleocapsid protein
Surface and nucleocapsid proteins
Not reported
Type of specimen for RT-PCR reference test:
Sputum, saliva, or oral, throat, or pharyngeal
Not reported
No of specimens for RT-PCR reference test:
1 or not reported
RT-PCR=reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction.
Denominator is 39 studies reporting sensitivity.
in 18% (7/40), and specificity alone in 3% (1/40).33
Risk of bias
Applicability concerns
Fig 2 | Summary of quality assessment of diagnostic accuracy studies 2 (QUADAS-2) assessment
Method and studies
ELISA (n=13 arms)
LFIA (n=36 arms)
Hospital admission group
Triage group
CLIA (n=10 arms)
IgG or IgM
Sensitivity (%) (95% CI)
Sensitivity (%) (95% CI)
Sensitivity (%) (95% CI)
Method and studies
Sensitivity (%) (95% CI)
IgG or IgM
Sensitivity (%) (95% CI)
Sensitivity (%) (95% CI)
Ig=immunoglobulin; TP=true positive; FN=false negative; TN=true negative; FP=false positive; ELISA=enzyme linked immunosorbent assay; LFIA=lateral flow immunoassay;
CLIA=chemiluminescent immunoassay.
*Pooled estimates were calculated using bivariate random effects meta-analysis; as such, they depart from what would be estimated by simple division of numerator by denominator.
were available for 44 patients across all study arms
(2% of LFIAs performed). All 39 studies that reported
sensitivity used RT-PCR as the reference standard to
rule in SARS-CoV-2 infection, but the type and number
of specimens varied.
individual QUADAS-2 evaluations. For the patient
selection domain, a high or unclear risk of bias was
seen in 98% (48/49) of QUADAS-2 assessments,
mostly related to a case-control design and not using
consecutive or random sampling. For the index test
domain, 73% (36/49) of assessments concluded a
high or unclear risk of bias because it was not clear
whether the serological test was interpreted blind
to the reference standard or whether the cut-off
values for classifying results as positive, negative,
or indeterminate were prespecified. For LFIAs (18
of the QUADAS-2 assessments), when test results
are subjectively interpreted by a human reader (eg,
appearance of a line), a description of the number of
readers and assessment of reliability were provided in
17% (3/18) of assessments. For the reference standard
domain, we judged the risk of bias as unclear in 94%
(46/49) of assessments owing to inadequate details
about specimens used for RT-PCR or use of specimens
other than nasopharyngeal swabs. We also classified
the risk as unclear if fewer than two RT-PCRs were used
to rule out infection, or if the number was not reported.
Risk of bias from flow and timing was high or unclear
in 67% (33/49) owing to missing information or
results not stratified by the timing of sample collection
in relation to symptom onset. Major applicability
concerns for the index test were seen in 29% (14/49)
of assessments, mostly owing to LFIA being performed
in laboratories and not using point-of-care type
sitivity stratified by test type and immunoglobulin
class. Within each test method (CLIA, ELISA, LFIA),
point estimates were similar between the different
types of immunoglobulins, and confidence intervals
overlapped. Within each class of immunoglobulin,
reports on specificity. Pooled specificities ranged from
96.6% (95% confidence interval 94.3% to 98.2%) for
LFIAs measuring IgM and IgG, to 99.7% (99.0% to
100%) for ELISAs measuring IgM. Pooled specificity
for CLIA tests that measured IgM and IgG (n=2) could
not be estimated because of non-convergence. For
all test methods and immunoglobulin classes, visual
inspection of summary ROC curves (supplementary
showed important heterogeneity.
specificity reported in three studies that used sero
logical test methods other than ELISAs, LFIAs, or
CLIAs. Sensitivity or specificity, or both were low for
all, with the exception of an IgM enzyme immunoassay
reports sensitivity and specificity of serological tests
that measured IgA (one ELISA, one CLIA)47 51 and those
measuring total immunoglobulin levels (three ELISAs,
one CLIA, one LFIA).20 30 51 All four studies were
classified as high risk of bias from patient selection,
and unclear risk of bias from performance of the
reference standard, and three had high or unclear risk
of bias in the domains of index test performance and
ranged from 93.1% to 98.6%, and specificity from
potential sources of heterogeneity in sensitivity
accuracy. For ELISAs and LFIAs, accuracy estimates
at the sample level (ie, in studies when it was possible
for patients to contribute more than one sample to
the analysis) were similar to estimates using only
one sample for each patient. For CLIAs, specificity
was higher from studies reported at the sample level.
Point estimates for pooled sensitivity and specificity
were higher when both surface and nucleocapsid
proteins were used, although confidence intervals
overlapped. Point estimates of pooled sensitivity were
all three methods, with the strongest difference seen
tests was 88.2% (83.6% to 91.3%). For all three test
methods, pooled specificity was high when measured
in populations where covid-19 was not suspected,
regardless of whether the sampling had been done
before or during the epidemic. For both LFIAs and
CLIAs, pooled specificity was lower among individuals
with suspected covid-19 compared with other groups;
similar data were not available for ELISAs. For LFIAs,
Method and studies
ELISA (n=13 arms)
LFIA (n=36 arms)
Hospital admission group
Triage group
CLIA (n=10 arms)
IgG or IgM
Specificity (95% CI)
Specificity (95% CI)
Specificity (95% CI)
Method and studies
Specificity (95% CI)
IgG or IgM
Specificity (95% CI)
Specificity (95% CI)
Not estimable
Ig=immunoglobulin; TP=true positive; FN-false negative; TN=true negative; FP=false positive; ELISA=enzyme linked immunosorbent assay; LFIA=lateral flow immunoassay;
CLIA=chemiluminescent immunoassay.
*Pooled estimates were calculated using bivariate random effects meta-analysis; as such, they depart from what would be estimated by simple division of numerator by denominator.
specificity was lower when estimated in individuals
with other viral infections, but this was not the case for
ELISAs or CLIAs.
timing of sample collection in relation to symptom
onset. Regardless of immunoglobulin class or test
method, pooled sensitivity was lowest in the first week
of symptom onset and highest in the third week or
later. Data on specificity stratified by timing were not
with examples of hypothetical testing outcomes for
1000 people undergoing serological testing in settings
with a prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 ranging from 5%,
10%, and 20%. For example, in a population with a true
SARS-CoV-2 prevalence of 10%, for every 1000 people
tested with an LFIA: among those who had covid-19,
66 will test positive and 34 will be incorrectly classified
as uninfected. Among those without covid-19, 869 will
test negative and 31 will be incorrectly classified as
having antibodies to SARS-CoV-2.
evidence on the diagnostic accuracy of serological tests
for covid-19 was found to be characterised by high risks
of bias, heterogeneity, and limited generalisability to
point-of-care testing and to outpatient populations.
We found sensitivities were consistently lower with the
LFIA method compared with ELISA and CLIA methods.
For each test method, the type of immunoglobulin being
measuredIgM, IgG, or bothwas not associated with
diagnostic accuracy. Pooled sensitivities were lower
after symptom onset compared with the third week
or later. Pooled specificities of each test method were
high. However, stratified results suggested specificity
was lower in individuals with suspected covid-19, and
that other viral infections could lead to false positive
results for the LFIA method. These observations
indicate important weaknesses in the evidence on
covid-19 serological tests, particularly those being
marketed as point-of-care tests.
Meaning of the study
The utility of a low cost, rapid, and accurate point-ofcare test55 has spurred the development and marketing
of several covid-19 LFIA serological tests.56 We found
only two studies where LFIA had been performed
at the point of care. The low sensitivity of LFIA is of
particular concern given that most studies used sample
preparation steps that are likely to increase sensitivity
compared with the use of whole blood as would be
done at the point of care. These observations argue
against the use of LFIA serological tests for covid-19
beyond research and evaluation purposes and support
interim recommendations issued by the World Health
Cautious interpretation of specificity estimates is
warranted for several reasons. Importantly, few data
were available from people who were tested because
of suspected SARS-CoV-2 infection; hence our overall
pooled estimates might not be generalisable to people
who need testing because of covid-19 symptoms.
For CLIAs, the lower specificity among people with
suspected covid-19 could be a spurious finding from a
false negative RT-PCR result, given that the specificity
for CLIAs was high among people with confirmed
other viral infections. By contrast, for LFIAs, other
viral infections could have contributed to the lower
specificity in suspected covid-19.
Our time stratified analyses suggest that current
serological tests for covid-19 have limited utility in
the diagnosis of acute covid-19. For example, of those
tested for covid-19 within one week of symptom onset,
on average 44% to 87% will be falsely identified as
not having infection. And while sensitivity estimates
were higher in the third week or later, even at this time
point we found important false negative rates. For
example, in people with covid-19 who are tested three
weeks after symptom onset, ELISA IgG will misclassify
18% as not having been infected and LFIA IgG will
Overall, the poor performance of existing serological
tests for covid-19 raises questions about the utility
of using such methods for medical decision making,
particularly given time and effort required to do these
tests and the challenging workloads many clinics
are facing. Our findings should also give pause to
governments that are contemplating the use of
serological testsin particular, point-of-care tests
to issue immunity certificates or passports. For
example, if an LFIA is applied to a population with a
true SARS-CoV-2 prevalence of 10%, for every 1000
people tested, 31 who never had covid-19 will be
incorrectly told they are immune, and 34 people who
Potential source of heterogeneity
ELISA: Yes
ELISA: No
LFIA: Yes
LFIA: No
CLIA: Yes
CLIA: No
Data level:
ELISA: Patient
ELISA: Sample
LFIA: Patient
LFIA: Sample
CLIA: Patient
CLIA: Sample
Antigen target
Surface protein
Nucleocapsid protein
Surface and nucleocapsid proteins
Surface protein
Nucleocapsid protein
Surface and nucleocapsid proteins
Surface protein
Nucleocapsid protein
Surface and nucleocapsid proteins
ELISA: Yes
ELISA: No
LFIA: Yes
LFIA: No
CLIA: Yes
CLIA: No
Population for estimating specificity
Samples collected before covid-19 epidemic
Samples collected during covid-19 epidemic in individuals not
suspected of having covid-19
Individuals with suspected covid-19 but RT-PCR negative result
Individuals with confirmed other viral infection
Samples collected before covid-19 epidemic
Samples collected during covid-19 epidemic in
individuals not suspected of having covid-19
Individuals with suspected covid-19 but RT-PCR negative result
Individuals with confirmed other viral infection
Samples collected before covid-19 epidemic
Samples collected during covid-19 epidemic in
individuals not suspected of having covid-19
Individuals with suspected covid-19 but RT-PCR negative result
Individuals with confirmed other viral infection
No of
Pooled sensitivity
Pooled specificity
TP=true positive; FN=false negative; TN=true negative; FP=false positive; ELISA=enzyme linked immunosorbent assay; LFIA=lateral flow immunoassay; CLIA=chemiluminescent immunoassay;
RT-PCR=reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
*Pooled estimates were calculated using bivariate random effects meta-analysis; as such, they depart from what would be estimated by simple division of numerator by denominator.
Pooled estimates were calculated using univariate random effects meta-analysis.
had covid-19 will be incorrectly told that they were
never infected.
have taken an unprecedented larger role58 in discussions
and policy making around covid-19hence the impor
Time post-onset
First week
Second week
Third week or later
First week
Second week
Third week or later
First week
Second week
Third week or later
No of arms
Pooled sensitivity (95% CI)
No of arms
Pooled sensitivity (95% CI)
Ig=immunoglobulin; TP=true positive; FN=false negative; ELISA=enzyme linked immunosorbent assay; LFIA=lateral flow immunoassay; CLIA=chemiluminescent immunoassay.
*First week range: 0-7 days (one cohort reporting 0-10 days is counted here), second week: 7-14 days, third week: 15 days or more.
Pooled estimates were calculated using univariate random effects meta-analysis, which is why they depart from estimates calculated by simple division of true positives by the sum of true
positives and false negatives.
potential sources of bias. Finally, a second investigator
verified all data extraction.
Our study also has some limitations. Most impor
tantly, we compared pooled estimates between diffe
rent study populations. As such, the possibility of
confounding exists (eg, from differences in timing of
sampling between studies), explaining differences
in sensitivity or specificity.59 This approach was
taken because few studies performed head-to-head
comparisons. We did not perform metaregression as
many studies would have been excluded owing to
limited reporting of covariates. Another limitation
is that as we did not search Embase we might have
Conclusion and future research
Future studies to evaluate serological tests for covid-19
should be designed to overcome the major limitations
of the existing evidence base. This can be readily
accomplished by adhering to the fundamentals of
the design for diagnostic accuracy studies: a well
defined use-case (ie, specific purpose for which the
test is being used); consecutive sampling of the target
population within the target use-case; performance of
the index test in a standardised and blinded manner
using the same methods that will be applied in the
specialty; and ensuring the reference test is accurate,
performed on all participants, and interpreted blind
to the results of the index test. To reduce the likeli
Results per 1000 patients tested (95% CI)
Test method
Population: SARS-CoV-2 infected
ELISA (IgG or IgM):
9 studies, 766 samples. Pooled sensitivity 84.3%
(95% CI 75.6% to 90.9%)
LFIA (IgG or IgM):
11 studies, 2660 samples. Pooled sensitivity 66.0%
(95% CI 49.3% to 79.3%)
CLIA (IgG or IgM):
2 studies, 375 samples. Pooled sensitivity 97.8%
(95% CI 46.2% to 100%)
Population: not infected with SARS-CoV-2
ELISA (IgG or IgM):
6 studies, 1109 samples. Pooled specificity 97.6%
(95% CI 93.2% to 99.4%)
LFIA (IgG or IgM):
11 studies, 2874 samples. Pooled specificity 96.6%
(95% CI 94.3% to 98.2%)
9 studies, 2804 samples. Pooled specificity 97.8%
(95% CI 62.9% to 99.9%)
Classification by serology test
Correctly classified as infected
Incorrectly classified as uninfected
Correctly classified as infected
Incorrectly classified as uninfected
Correctly classified as infected
Incorrectly classified as uninfected
Correctly classified as uninfected
Incorrectly classified as infected
Correctly classified as uninfected
Incorrectly classified as infected
Correctly classified as uninfected
Incorrectly classified as infected
Quality of evidence and practical implications: Pooled sensitivity and specificity should be interpreted with caution. Accuracy might have been over-estimated in most studies owing to bias
arising from patient selection or how index and reference tests were performed, or both. Estimates of sensitivity and specificity were inconsistent between studies (heterogeneity was important).
Estimates might have limited applicability to outpatient settings and for testing at the point of care. Point-of-care LFIAs consistently had the lowest sensitivity and specificity. The poorest
RT-PCR=reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction; ELISA=enzyme linked immunosorbent assay; LFIA=lateral flow immunoassay; CLIA=chemiluminescent immunoassay;
Ig=immunoglobulin; SARS-CoV-2=severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2; covid-19=coronavirus disease 2019.
Index test: serology tests to detect immunoglobulins to SARS-CoV-2. Target condition: covid-19, reference standard: RT-PCR, Studies: predominantly case-control design diagnostic test accuracy.
hood of misclassification, the reference standard
should consist of RT-PCR performed on at least two
consecutive specimens, and, when feasible, include
viral cultures. To reduce variability in estimates and
enhance generalisability, sensitivity and specificity
should be stratified by setting (outpatient versus inpatient), severity of illness, and the number of days
elapsed since symptom onset.
In summary, we have found major weaknesses in the
evidence base for serological tests for covid-19. The
evidence does not support the continued use of existing
point-of-care serological tests for covid-19. While the
scientific community should be lauded for the pace at
which novel serological tests have been developed, this
studies to evaluate these tools. With international
collaboration, such studies could be rapidly conducted
and provide less biased, more precise, and more
generalisable information on which to base clinical
and public health policy to alleviate the unprecedented
global health emergency that is covid-19.
assistance in developing the search strategy for Ovid-Medline and the
preprint literature, and Coralie Gesic for designing the forest plots. The
Contributors: MLB and FAK (equally) and AB, DM, and JC conceived
the study and study design. MLB drafted the initial search strategy
and executed the search. MLB, GT, and FAK screened the studies. MLB,
GT, SL, EM, AT, ZL, and SA extracted data extraction and performed
the quality assessment. MLB, AB, FAK, and ZL analysed the data. MLB
criteria have been omitted.
Funding: This study was funded (publication costs) by a grant
(ECRF-R1-30) from the McGill Interdisciplinary Initiative in Infection
Health Research (award #FRD143350). JRC is supported by Fonds
de Recherche Sante Quebec (FRSQ award #258907 and #287869).
SL holds a research training award from the FRSQ. AB holds a
research salary award from the FRSQ. AT is supported by Conselho
Nacional de Ensino, Pesquisa e Desenvolvimento Tecnolgico
(award #303267/2018-6). FAK receives salary support from the
had no input into the study design, data collection, data analysis or
interpretation, report writing, or the decision to submit the paper for
disclosure.pdf and declare: SL reports personal fees from Carebook
Technologies, outside the submitted work; no financial relationships
with any organisations that might have an interest in the submitted
work in the previous three years; no other relationships or activities
that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.
Ethical approval: Not required.
accurate, and transparent account of the study being reported; that
no important aspects of the study have been omitted; and that any
discrepancies from the study as planned (and, if relevant, registered)
have been explained.
Dissemination to participants and related patient and public
communities: The results of the meta-analysis will be disseminated
to patients, providers, policy makers through social media, and
academic and institutional networks.
which permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work
Winichakoon P, Chaiwarith R, Liwsrisakun C, et al. Negative
nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs do not rule out covid-19. J
Chen Z, Li Y, Wu B, Hou Y, Bao J, Deng X. A patient with covid-19
presenting a false-negative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
Sethuraman N, Jeremiah SS, Ryo A. Interpreting Diagnostic Tests for
American Society for Microbiology. ASM expresses concern about
Maxmen A. The researchers taking a gamble with antibody tests for
Liberati A, Altman DG, Tetzlaff J, et al. The PRISMA statement for
evaluate healthcare interventions: explanation and elaboration.
Saah AJ, Hoover DR. Sensitivity and specificity reconsidered:
the meaning of these terms in analytical and diagnostic settings.
Meyer B, Drosten C, Mller MA. Serological assays for emerging
coronaviruses: challenges and pitfalls. Virus Res 2014;194:175-83.
Woo PC, Lau SK, Wong BH, et al. Differential sensitivities of severe
acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus spike polypeptide
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and SARS coronavirus
nucleocapsid protein ELISA for serodiagnosis of SARS coronavirus
Woo PCY, Lau SKP, Wong BHL, et al. Detection of specific antibodies
to severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus
nucleocapsid protein for serodiagnosis of SARS coronavirus
Whiting PF, Rutjes AW, Westwood ME, et al, QUADAS-2 Group.
QUADAS-2: a revised tool for the quality assessment of
diagnostic accuracy studies. Ann Intern Med 2011;155:529-36.
R: A language and environment for statistical computing [program]:
Bates D, Mchler M, Bolker B, et al. Fitting linear mixed-effects
Cassaniti I, Novazzi F, Giardina F, et al, Members of the San Matteo
Pavia COVID-19 Task Force. Performance of VivaDiag COVID-19
IgM/IgG Rapid Test is inadequate for diagnosis of COVID-19 in
acute patients referring to emergency room department. J Med
Gao HX, Li YN, Xu ZG, et al. Detection of serum immunoglobulin
M and immunoglobulin G antibodies in 2019 novel
coronavirus infected patients from different stages.
Guo L, Ren L, Yang S, et al. Profiling early humoral response
to diagnose novel coronavirus disease (covid-19). Clin Infect
Liu W, Liu L, Kou G, et al. Evaluation of nucleocapsid and spike
protein-based ELISAs for detecting antibodies against SARS-CoV-2. J
Zhang W, Du RH, Li B, et al. Molecular and serological investigation
of 2019-nCoV infected patients: implication of multiple shedding
Zhao J, Yuan Q, Wang H, et al. Antibody responses to SARSCoV-2 in patients of novel coronavirus disease 2019. Clin Infect
To KK, Tsang OT, Leung WS, et al. Temporal profiles of viral load
in posterior oropharyngeal saliva samples and serum antibody
responses during infection by SARS-CoV-2: an observational cohort
23 Li Z, Yi Y, Luo X, et al. Development and clinical application of a rapid
IgM-IgG combined antibody test for SARS-CoV-2 infection diagnosis. J
24 Cai X, Chen J, Hu J, et al. A peptide-based magnetic
chemiluminescence enzyme immunoassay for serological diagnosis
of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19). MedRxiv (Preprint).
25 Gao Y, Yuan Y, Li TT, et al. Evaluation the auxiliary diagnosis value of
antibodies assays for detection of novel coronavirus (SARS-Cov-2)
causing an outbreak of pneumonia (COVID-19). MedRxiv (Preprint).
26 Jia X, Zhang P, Tian Y, et al. Clinical significance of IgM and IgG test for
diagnosis of highly suspected COVID-19 infection. MedRxiv (Preprint).
27 Lin D, Liu L, Zhang M, et al. Evaluations of serological test
in the diagnosis of 2019 novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2)
infections during the COVID-19 outbreak. MedRxiv (Preprint).
28 Liu L, Liu W, Wang S, et al. A preliminary study on serological assay
for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARSCoV-2) in 238 admitted hospital patients. MedRxiv (Preprint).
29 Liu Y, Liu Y, Diao B, et al. Diagnostic Indexes of a Rapid IgG/IgM
Combined Antibody Test for SARS-CoV-2. MedRxiv (Preprint).
30 Lou B, Li T, Zheng S, et al. Serology characteristics of SARS-CoV-2
infection since the exposure and post symptoms onset. MedRxiv
31 Pan Y, Li X, Yang G, et al. Serological immunochromatographic
approach in diagnosis with SARS-CoV-2 infected COVID-19 patients. J
32 Zhang P, Gao Q, Wang T, et al. Evaluation of recombinant
nucleocapsid and spike proteins for serological diagnosis of novel
33 Zhao R, Li M, Song H, et al. Serological diagnostic kit of SARS-CoV-2
antibodies using CHO-expressed full-length SARS-CoV-2 S1 proteins.
34 Long Qx, Deng Hj, Chen J, et al. Antibody responses to SARSCoV-2 in COVID-19 patients: the perspective application
of serological tests in clinical practice. MedRxiv (Preprint).
36 Infantino M, Grossi V, Lari B, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of an
automated chemiluminescent immunoassay for anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgM
and IgG antibodies: an Italian experience. J Med Virol 2020;24:24.
37 Garcia FP, Perez Tanoira R, Romanyk Cabrera JP, et al. Rapid diagnosis
of SARS-CoV-2 infection by detecting IgG and IgM antibodies with an
immunochromatographic device: a prospective single-center study.
38 Zhong L, Chuan J, Gong B, et al. Detection of serum IgM and IgG
for COVID-19 diagnosis. Sci China Life Sci 2020;63:777-80.
39 Jin Y, Wang M, Zuo Z, et al. Diagnostic value and dynamic variance
of serum antibody in coronavirus disease 2019. Int J Infect
40 Xie J, Ding C, Li J, et al. Characteristics of patients with coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) confirmed using an IgM-IgG antibody test. J Med
41 Xiang F, Wang X, He X, et al. Antibody Detection and Dynamic
Characteristics in Patients with COVID-19. Clin Infect Dis 2020;19:19.
42 Freeman B, Lester S, Mills L, et al. Validation of a SARS-CoV-2 spike
protein ELISA for use in contact investigations and serosurveillance.
43 Paradiso AV, De Summa S, Loconsole D, et al. Clinical meanings
of rapid serological assay in patients tested for SARS-Co2 RT-PCR.
44 Imai K, Tabata S, Ikeda M, et al. Clinical evaluation of an
immunochromatographic IgM/IgG antibody assay and chest
computed tomography for the diagnosis of COVID-19. MedRxiv
45 Yangchun F. Optimize Clinical Laboratory Diagnosis of COVID-19
from Suspect Cases by Likelihood Ratio of SARS-CoV-2 IgM and IgG
46 Qian C, Zhou M, Cheng F, et al. Development and Multicenter
Performance Evaluation of The First Fully Automated SARSCoV-2 IgM and IgG Immunoassays. MedRxiv (Preprint).
47 Ma H, Zeng W, He H, et al. COVID-19 diagnosis and study
of serum SARS-CoV-2 specific IgA, IgM and IgG by a
quantitative and sensitive immunoassay. MedRxiv (Preprint).
48 Perera RA, Mok CK, Tsang OT, et al. Serological assays for severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), March
49 Adams ER, An R, et al. Evaluation of antibody testing for SARS-Cov-2
using ELISA and lateral flow immunoassaysP. MedRxiv (Preprint).
50 Burbelo PD, Riedo FX, Morishima C, et al. Detection of Nucleocapsid
Antibody to SARS-CoV-2 is More Sensitive than Antibody
to Spike Protein in COVID-19 Patients. medRxiv (Preprint).
51 Lassauniere R, Frische A, Harboe ZB, et al. Evaluation of nine
52 Whitman JD, Hiatt J, Mowery CT, et al. Test performance evaluation of
53 Hoffman T, Nissen K, Krambrich J, et al. Evaluation of a COVID-19 IgM
and IgG rapid test; an efficient tool for assessment of past exposure
54 Dhla M, Boesecke C, Schulte B, et al. Rapid point-of-care testing for
SARS-CoV-2 in a community screening setting shows low sensitivity.
55 Beeching NJ, Fletcher TE, Beadsworth MBJ. Covid-19: testing times.
56 Petherick A. Developing antibody tests for SARS-CoV-2.
57 World Health Organization. Advice on the use of point-of-care
immunodiagnostic tests for COVID-19: scientific brief, 8 April
58 Majumder MS, Mandl KD. Early in the epidemic: impact of preprints
on global discourse about COVID-19 transmissibility. Lancet Glob
