Open Access Technical COVID‐19: Precautionary Guidelines for Hani
B. ALBalawi 1 Several coronaviruses can infect  humans,  and  the
globally  endemic  human  coronaviruses,  HCoV‐229E (human coron‐
avirus 229E), HCoV‐NL63 (human  coronavirus  NL63),  and  others,
tend to cause mild respiratory diseases. The zoonotic Middle East
respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS‐CoV) and severe acute res‐
piratory syndrome coronavirus type1 (SARS‐CoV1) have high fatali‐
ty rates. In December 2019, the World Health  Organization  (WHO)
was was identified in January 2020 as a novel coronavirus family.
The  WHO  refers  to  the  virus  as  coronavirus  disease   2019
(COVID‐19).  Within  several  weeks,  the  outbreak has become an
emergency, and many  countries  have  since  been  affected.  The
method  of  transmission is not yet fully known but is thought to
be mainly respiratory. Healthcare  providers,  particularly  oph‐
thalmologists,  are  at high risk of a COVID‐19 infection through
unprotected contact with eye secretions during routine ophthalmic
examinations  that  involve  the use of direct ophthalmoscopy and
slit‐lamp examinations, which are usually performed in a  setting
that  allows for close doctor‐patient contact. In light of these,
specific measures are needed from an ophthalmic point of view  to
control  the  COVID‐19  outbreak and to protect health care Cate‐
gories: Ophthalmology, Preventive  Medicine,  Infectious  Disease
Keywords:  covid‐19,  conjunctivitis,  prevention  ophthalmology,
ophthalmology, guideline, infection, health care  worker  safety,
corona  pandemic,  coronavirus  guidelines, coronavirus ALBalawi.
This is an open access unrestricted use, distribution, and repro‐
duction  in  any  medium, provided A 33‐year‐old ophthalmologist,
Dr. Li Wenliang, was the first to raise the alarm about a cluster
of  severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)‐like pneumonia cases
late December 2019 at Wuhan City, China. Regrettably, that  warn‐
ing  was  not taken seriously. Following that, Dr. Li returned to
work and, unfortunately, contracted the virus  from  an  asympto‐
matic  glaucoma patient in early January. Later on, Dr. Li passed
away, leaving behind a child and a wife,  who  is  pregnant,  and
opened  the  doors  and  discussions  about the risk of infection
among ophthalmologists. A survey study by Nair and colleagues re‐
ported  that  the  majority  of ophthalmologists in India (59.1%)
felt that ophthalmologists were potentially at a higher  risk  of
contracting COVID‐19 as compared to other specialties while exam‐
ining patients [1]. In fact, ophthalmologists are at high risk of
contracting  the  COVID‐19  virus through unprotected eye contact
with secretions during routine ophthalmic examinations  with  di‐
rect ophthalmoscopy and slit‐lamp examinations, which are usually
performed in a setting that has close doctor‐patient contact.  On
December  31,  2019,  the WHO was notified by China about an out‐
break of pneumonia with an initially unknown  etiology  in  Wuhan
city  in  Hubei province. In January 2020, the causative organism
was identified as a novel member of the coronavirus family.  Ini‐
tially  tentatively  named 2019 novel coronavirus (2019‐nCoV) and
named SARS‐CoV‐ Albalawi H B (June 25,  2020)  COVID‐19:  Precau‐
tionary  Guidelines for Ophthalmologists. Cureus 12(6): type 2 by
the International Committee of Taxonomy of Viruses  (ICTV),  this
virus  is the cause of the disease named coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID‐19). To date, COVID‐19 has already confirmed to  have  af‐
fected over 5,000,000 people and caused over 300,00 deaths world‐
wide, spanning 205 countries in South East  Asia,  Europe,  North
America,  Australia,  and  the Middle East and led to huge public
health challenges [2].  The transmission route of COVID‐19 is not
yet fully known but it is thought to be mainly respiratory. It is
even more overwhelming that many infected persons showed  no  ap‐
parent  respiratory  symptoms  and presented with non‐respiratory
manifestations, including conjunctivitis in the ocular tissue [3]
and  diarrhea  in  the  gastrointestinal system [4]. COVID‐19 may
spread through the eyes mucous membrane via indirect contact with
droplets.  The  variable presentation of the disease makes trans‐
mission via contact, especially for health  care  providers  like
ophthalmologists,  possible.  Since the outbreak, more than 3,300
healthcare professionals having been infected,  with  44  deaths,
including one ophthalmologist. Multiple comprehensive recommenda‐
tions by the American Academy of Ophthalmology (AAO)  [5]  and  a
well‐designed  study  from  Hong  Kong [6] were announced helping
ophthalmologists for safe provide instructions and uniform guide‐
lines.  This paper aimed to provide an evidence‐based recommenda‐
tion. Subsequent information about the  nature  of  COVID‐19  may
change  these  recommendations  in the future. In light of these,
specific measures are needed from an ophthalmic point of view  to
control the COVID‐019 outbreak and to protect health care Techni‐
cal Report Before encountering patients during a  pandemic  lock‐
down  Because  of the disease’s contagiousness and way of spread,
it is better and safe to keep nonurgent patients  away  from  the
hospital  during  the  pandemic period. The priority should be on
how to reduce the risk of COVID‐19 virus transmission from  human
to  human  and the rate of new case development. Then, we flatten
the curve and not overwhelm the health services and limited  sup‐
ply  of  hospital  beds, intensive care unit (ICU) beds, ventila‐
tors, and others. Second, direct all disposable medical  supplies
and  focus  them  on  hospitals  where  they are most needed [5].
Therefore, all non‐urgent routine follow‐up  and  surgeries  like
mild  nonproliferative  diabetic retinopathy or routine scheduled
cataract surgery should be postponed. It is even  better  if  pa‐
tients can be sent text messages or called to discuss the need to
reschedule their appointment or a public announcement  to  cancel
all  routine follow‐up visits and surgeries, in order to minimize
all non‐urgent cases coming to the eye clinic or hospital [5].  A
three‐stage  control  measure  to  reduce the transmission of the
virus in the ophthalmology department in Hong Kong was  based  on
text messaging to reschedule refill visits [6]; a triage to iden‐
tify patients with fever, conjunctivitis, and  respiratory  symp‐
toms;  asking  those who recently traveled to areas infected with
the virus to postpone their ophthalmology visits for 14 days; and
the  avoidance  of micro‐aerosol generating procedures, nasal en‐
doscopy, and operations under general  anesthesia.  In  addition,
infection control was provided to the environment and health per‐
sonnel.  When facing patients during the pandemic lockdown Always
keep  in  mind that the main goal during this pandemic is to pro‐
tect yourself and your patient, preserve all health  services  to
stop its spread, and prevent the health system from being compro‐
mised. It is safer to divide patients who attend eye  clinics  or
have  ophthalmology  clinics that see patients should be equipped
with screening stations before entry to the waiting area and must
take  a  detailed history about any respiratory illnesses, fever,
recent return from high‐risk areas, or contact with  family  mem‐
bers  recently back from one of the countries battling a COVID‐19
outbreak [5]. This way, every patient can be classified  as  low,
medium,  or high risk. This should be coupled with nurse‐directed
triage protocols to determine if an appointment is  necessary  or
if  the  patient  can  reschedule and be sent home to ensure safe
triage and isolation of patients presenting with  COVID‐19  symp‐
toms  or  other  respiratory infections. Those at low risk can be
attended to with standard precautions. Medium‐risk patients  with
non‐urgent ophthalmic problems should be asked to return home and
reschedule their appointment [5]. High‐risk patients with a  non‐
urgent  ophthalmic  problem  should  be sent patients with urgent
ophthalmic problems should be put in the examination lane immedi‐
ately  in order to decrease the time spent at the clinic. The pa‐
tient, the ophthalmologist, and all health care personnel  should
wear  surgical  masks, gowns, gloves, and eye protection. In case
of any planned procedure that results in an aerosolized virus, an
N95  mask  should be worn. Highrisk or COVID‐19 positive patients
with urgent ophthalmic problems can be seen but  after  following
local  hospital  guidelines and precautions for treating patients
with COVID‐19 or that of the Centers for Disease Control and Pre‐
vention  (CDC)  such  as using an N95 mask, eye including using a
breath shield during a slit‐lamp exam or any clear plastic barri‐
er  to  block the transfer of breaths between the patient and the
doctor (2). Ophthalmologists should tell their patients that they
will speak as little as possible during the slit‐lamp examination
and request that the patients also  refrain  from  talking.  They
should  always  use protection for the mouth, nose, and eyes when
caring for patients  potentially  infected  with  COVID‐19.  They
should also keep the waiting room as empty as possible and advise
seated patients to remain at least two  meters  (around  6  feet)
from  one  another [5]. As much as is prudent, they should reduce
the visits of the most vulnerable patients. Patients with or sus‐
pected  to  have  COVID‐19 should be cared for in a single‐person
room with the door closed. Limited points of entry to the facili‐
ty  is strongly recommended too.  No symptoms (e.g, cough, fever,
breathlessness, diarrhea. No contact with someone  who  is  SARS‐
CoV‐2  positive.  No stay in a high‐risk area during the previous
14 days Presence of symptoms with: No medical history or  contact
with  someone  who is SARS‐CoV‐2 positive. No stay in a high‐risk
area during the previous 14 days At least one symptom out of  the
following:  Contact with someone who is SARS‐CoV‐2 positive. Stay
in a high‐ risk area during the previous 14 days  TABLE  1:  Risk
groups  and  symptoms of possible SARS‐CoV‐2 (COVID‐19) infection
in patients seeing at an ophthalmology clinic SARS‐CoV‐2:  severe
acute  respiratory  syndrome coronavirus 2 Reopening the ophthal‐
mology clinic Before opening a routine clinic, checklist criteria
that  aim at safe opening should be available. Complying with lo‐
cal governmental guidance, these guidelines should be closely the
success  of  your  practice reopening, including an assessment of
your personal protective equipment (PPE) needs  and  alternatives
such  as  cloth  masks, eye protection, and others [8].  Evaluate
the clinics to determine what kinds  of  surfaces  and  materials
make  up  that  area,  as most surfaces just need normal, routine
cleaning; however, frequently  touched  surfaces  like  doorknobs
will  need to be cleaned with soap and water and then disinfected
using United States  Environmental  Protection  Agency  (EPA)‐ap‐
proved  disinfectant.  If  a disinfectant is unavailable, you can
use one‐third cup of bleach added to 1 gallon of water or 70% al‐
cohol solutions to staff who do not need to be physically present
in the office stay at home and work remotely.  Even more, consid‐
er  bringing  employees back in stages, at different parts of the
day, or working on alternative days. Start with a few outpatients
visits a day and work on a modified schedule to avoid high volume
or density. Unless necessary, ask patients to attend alone,  keep
the waiting room as empty as possible, and advise seated patients
to remain at least two meters (around 6 feet) from  one  another,
consider  another option to wait in the clinic by asking patients
to wait in their car or outside and text or calling when the  ap‐
pointment is ready. Remove magazines, brochures, remote controls,
and other shared items from waiting and exam rooms.  Follow  U.S.
Centers  for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidance, which
requires all individuals who visit the office  to  wear  a  cloth
face  covering.  This  should  be explained to patients and other
visitors before they arrive at  the  clinic.  Prioritize  seniors
above  60 years, those with chronic diseases like diabetes melli‐
tus, and patients on chemotherapy to be seen and leave the clinic
early. The availability of screening stations before entry to the
waiting area should also continue to pick up any suspected  cases
and  then  deal with them as high‐risk patients.  between the pa‐
tient and the doctor After seeing a patient  After  seeing  every
patient,  standard  cleaning and disinfection should apply to all
patient care, regardless of the suspected or confirmed  infection
status  of  the patient [5]. Wear single‐use gloves when cleaning
and disinfecting surfaces. All ophthalmic instruments,  including
slitlamps,  tonometer, and contact lenses, and all places the pa‐
tient touched should be disinfected.  Standard  hand  hygiene  is
critical, including frequent hand wash with soap and water for at
least 20 seconds before and after seeing patients  [8].  If  soap
and  water  are  not readily available, use a hand sanitizer that
contains at least 60% alcohol [5]. The virus causing COVID‐19  is
an  enveloped virus, making it very susceptible to the same alco‐
hol‐ and bleach‐based disinfectants that ophthalmologists common‐
ly  use to disinfect ophthalmic instruments and office furniture.
Some methods recommended by the CDC to disinfect and destroy  the
COVID‐19  virus include alcohol solutions with at least 70% alco‐
hol and diluted bleach. However, the United States  Environmental
Protection  Agency  (EPA) shared a list of antimicrobial products
like Stepan Company (Northfield, Illinois) products (disinfectant
spray)  that  are  expected to be effective against COVID‐19 [9].
The importance of disinfecting ophthalmic examination instruments
to minimize cross‐infections and protect ophthalmic medical staff
is clear. There are a wide range of disinfectants available  that
can  be used to disinfect surfaces. Kampf et al.  found that some
members of the coronavirus family ‐ SARS and Middle East respira‐
tory syndrome (MERS) ‐ can persist on surfaces like metal, glass,
or plastic for up to nine days but can be efficiently inactivated
by  surface disinfection with 62%‐71% ethanol, 0.5% hydrogen per‐
oxide, or 0.1% sodium hypochlorite within one minute. Other  bio‐
cidal  agents,  such  as  0.05%  to 0.2% benzalkonium chloride or
0.02%  chlorhexidine  digluconate,  are  less   effective   [10].
COVID‐19 infection and possible eye involvement Severe acute res‐
piratory syndrome coronavirus type 2 (SARS‐CoV‐2), also known  as
COVID‐19  virus,  is a species of the coronavirus family that in‐
fects humans, bats, and certain other mammals. In fact, bats  are
a  major reservoir of many strains of SARS‐related coronaviruses,
and several strains have been identified in  palm  civets,  which
were  likely  ancestors of SARS‐CoV‐2. Cross‐species transmission
(CST), also called host jump, or spillover, is the ability  of  a
foreign virus, once introduced into a new host species, to infect
that individual and spread throughout the new host population, as
has  happened  with swine flu, SARS‐COV‐1, and now COVID‐19 [11].
It is a member of the genus betacoronavirus and subgenus Sarbeco‐
ronavirus  and is an enveloped positive‐sense single‐stranded RNA
virus that enters its host cell by binding  to  the  angiotensin‐
converting enzyme 2 receptor (ACE2) receptor [12]. Human to human
transmission occurs with close contact with an  infected  person.
This  primarily  occurs when an infected person coughs or sneezes
and produces respiratory droplets that spread like other respira‐
tory  pathogens.  These droplets can settle in the mouth or nasal
mucosa and lungs of people who inhale the air [13].  However,  it
is  widely  agreed that the clinical picture varies from a simple
respiratory infection, which presents with  symptoms  such  as  a
runny  nose, sore throat, fever, and coughing to more complicated
findings like septic shock [14]. Similar to  SARS‐CoV  and  MERS‐
CoV,  which  caused  epidemics in the past years, the usual first
symptoms are commonly defined as fever, cough, and  shortness  of
breath. In 99 patients with COVID‐19 virus infection, chest pain,
confusion, and nausea‐vomiting were noted in addition to previous
findings  [15].  X‐ray  and  thorax  CT  imaging of patients with
COVID‐19 showed unilateral or  bilateral  involvement  compatible
with  viral pneumonia. Reported complications include acute heart
damage, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), secondary in‐
fections,  pneumothorax, and some patients with other comorbidity
exhibited more severe symptoms and even death [16]. The diagnosis
of  COVID‐19  infection  is  based on history, including detailed
contact and travel history aided by laboratory testing. Viral in‐
fection  laboratory  testing  methods  are  important,  including
serology tests and viral culture. The most commonly used diagnos‐
tic methods are molecular methods, such as reverse transcription‐
polymerase chain reaction (RT‐PCR) or real‐time PCR  by  using  a
respiratory  sample  as  the oropharyngeal swab, sputum, or bron‐
choalveolar lavage.  Unfortunately, the COVID‐19 virus  not  only
affects the respiratory tracts, it also may manifest in other re‐
gions like the gastrointestinal tract and ocular tissues, as con‐
junctivitis has been reported during this outbreak and conjuncti‐
val secretions yielded positive RT‐PCR results [17].   This  sug‐
gests that COVID‐19 can infect the conjunctiva and cause conjunc‐
tivitis, and virus family can occasionally  cause  conjunctivitis
in humans. In fact, human coronavirus NL 63 (HCoV‐NL63) was first
identified in a baby with bronchiolitis and conjunctivitis. In 28
cases  of  children  with confirmed HCoV‐NL63 infections, 17% had
conjunctivitis [18]. Clinical entities, such  as  conjunctivitis,
anterior  uveitis,  retinitis, and optic neuritis, have been seen
in animal models [19]. One of the affected healthcare workers re‐
ported  his  experience  of  the  disease.   Despite  being fully
dressed in a protective suit and N95 respirator, he was still in‐
fected by the virus, with the first symptom being unilateral con‐
junctivitis, followed by fever. In spite of the controversy about
the  eye  as  the possible means of transmitting disease, Qing et
al. posit that the virus enters the tear duct  through  droplets,
which  may  pass through the nasolacrimal ducts and then into the
respiratory tract [20]. Combined with all  this  information,  we
assert  that  healthcare  professionals should use eye protection
when in close contact with patients.  At the time of the  pandem‐
ic,  with  limited information, no treatment for COVID‐19, and no
vaccine as yet, we will need to stay highly cautious to recognize
the possible non‐respiratory early manifestations of COVID‐19 in‐
fection, including the consideration of viral conjunctivitis as a
possible  presentation.  Healthcare professionals, including oph‐
thalmologists, should take the full recommended measures and pre‐
cautions  to  protect  themselves and their patients and stop the
spread of the infection.  Additional Information  involve  animal
subjects or tissue. Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the
ICMJE uniform declared that no  financial  support  was  received
from  any organization for the submitted work.  present or within
the previous three years with any organizations that  might  have
an  interest  in relationships or activities that could appear to
have influenced the submitted work.  Nair AG, Gandhi AR, Sundaram
N: Effect of COVID‐19 related lockdown on ophthalmic practice and
patient care in India: results of a survey. Indian J  Ophthalmol.
2020, 68:725‐730.  Lu CW, Liu XF, Jia Z‐F: 2019‐nCoV transmission
through the ocular surface must not  be  ignored.  Lancet.  2020,
395:e39. 10.1016/S0140‐6736(20)30313‐5 MD PNC, MD PMZ, PhD XD, et
al.: Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 99 cases  of
2019  novel  coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive
study. Lancet. 2020, American Academy of Ophthalmology. Important
coronavirus  updates for ophthalmologists .  (American Academy of
Ophthalmology. Important  coronavirus  updates  for  ophthalmolo‐
gists).   Lai THT, Tang EWH, Chau SKY, Fung KSC, Li KKW: Stepping
up infection control measures in ophthalmology during  the  novel
coronavirus outbreak: an experience from Hong Kong.  Graefes Arch
Clin       Exp       Ophthalmol.       2020,       258:1049‐1055.
10.1007/s00417‐020‐04641‐8  Repici  A,  Maselli R, Colombo M, Az‐
zolini E, Lagioia M: Coronavirus (COVID‐19)  outbreak:  what  the
department  of  endoscopy should know. Gastrointest Endosc. 2020,
92:192‐197.  American Medical Association. COVID‐19: A  physician
practice guide to reopening, Updated .  Kampf G, Todt D, Pfaender
S, Steinmann E: Persistence of coronaviruses  on  inanimate  sur‐
faces  and  its inactivation with biocidal agents. J Hosp Infect.
2020, 104:246‐251.  Hilds JE, Mackenzie JE,  Richt  JE:  Wildlife
and  emerging  zoonotic  diseases: the biology, circumstances and
consequences of cross‐species transmission. Current Topics in  Ge
XY,  Li  JL, Yang XL, et al.: Isolation and characterization of a
bat SARS‐like coronavirus that uses the  ACE2  receptor.  Nature.
2013,  503:535‐538.   Li J‐Y, You Z, Wang Q, et al.: The epidemic
of 2019‐novel‐coronavirus (2019‐nCoV) pneumonia and insights  for
emerging  infectious  diseases  in  the  future. Microbes Infect.
2020, Cipriano M, Ruberti E, Giacalone A: Gastrointestinal infec‐
tion  could be new focus for coronavirus diagnosis. Cureus. 2020,
12:e7422. 10.7759/cureus.7422 Chen N, Zhou M,  Dong  X,  et  al.:
Epidemiological  and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019
novel coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study.
Lancet. 2020, Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, et al.: Clinical features of
patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus  in  Wuhan,  China.
Lancet.  2020,  395:497‐506. 10.1016/S0140‐6736(20)30183‐5 Xia J,
Tong J, Liu M, Shen Y, Guo D: Evaluation of coronavirus in  tears
and  conjunctival  secretions  of patients with SARS‐CoV‐2 infec‐
tion. J Med Virol. 2020, 92:589‐594.  Vabret A, Mourez T, Dina J,
et  al.: Human coronavirus NL63, France . Emerg Infect Dis. 2005,
coronaviruses and ocular implications in humans and animals. Ocul
Immunol Inflamm. 2020, Qing H, Li Z, Yang Z, Shi M, Huang Z, Song
J, Song Z: The possibility of COVID‐19 transmission from  eye  to
nose. Acta Ophthalmologica. 2020, 98:e388. 10.1111/aos.14412



















































