Open Access Case Coronavirus (COVID‐19) Fulminant Myopericarditis
and Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) in  a  Middle‐Aged
Male Patient Hussain Hussain 1 , Aya Fadel 2 , Haidar Alwaeli 3 ,
Victor Guardiola  4  1.  Internal  Medicine,  Cardiology  Clinic,
Pasadena,  USA  2. Internal Medicine, Florida International York,
USA 4. Oncology, Baptist Health South  Florida,  Miami,  USA  My‐
opericarditis  remains a prominent infectious inflammatory disor‐
der throughout a patients  lifetime.  Moreover,  viral  pathogens
have  been proven to be the leading contributors to myopericardi‐
tis in the pediatric and adult populations. Despite  the  current
comprehensive  knowledge  of myocardial injury in viral and post‐
viral myopericarditis, the cellular and molecular  mechanisms  of
SARS‐CoV‐2‐induced  myopericarditis  are  poorly understood. This
report presents a case of coronavirus  (COVID‐19)  fulminant  my‐
opericarditis and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) in a
middle‐aged male patient: a 51‐year‐old man with a history of hy‐
pertension  who  arrived  to  the emergency department with a dry
cough, fatigue, dyspnea, and a fever. A real‐time  reverse  tran‐
scriptase‐polymerase  chain  reaction  (RT‐PCR) assay confirmed a
diagnosis of COVID‐19 infection, resulting in the patients admis‐
sion  to  the  airborne  isolation unit for clinical observation.
When his condition began to deteriorate, the patient  was  trans‐
ferred to the cardiac care unit after electrocardiography detect‐
ed cardiac injury, demonstrating  diffuse  ST‐segment  elevation.
Laboratory evaluations revealed elevated troponin T and BNP, with
an echocardiogram indicating global left ventricular  hypokinesia
and a reduced ejection fraction. The patient was treated with hy‐
droxychloroquine, azithromycin, dobutamine, remdesivir, and  ven‐
tilatory  support. This specific case highlights the severity and
complications that may arise as a direct result of  COVID‐19  in‐
fection.  Categories: Cardiology, Infectious Disease, Pulmonology
Keywords: coronavirus disease (covid‐19), diffuse  st  elevation,
myocarditis, sars‐cov‐2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome coron‐
avirus ‐2), ards, myopericarditis Hussain et al. This is an  open
access  unrestricted  use,  distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided Coronavirus disease  2019  (COVID‐19),  a  viral
respiratory  disease of possible zoonotic origin that surfaced in
2019, is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome  coronavirus
2  (SARSCoV‐2) [1]. Patients with confirmed severe acute respira‐
tory syndrome coronavirus SARS‐CoV‐2 infection can  present  with
flu‐like  symptoms  that  may include a fever, lethargy, anosmia,
ageusia, rhinorrhea, myalgia, a dry cough,  a  sore  throat,  and
other  nonspecific  symptoms  such  as diarrhea or abdominal pain
[1]. Severe complications of COVID‐19 infection  include  pneumo‐
nia, respiratory failure from acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS), septic shock, and acute myopericarditis [1‐2].  This  re‐
port  presents a middle‐aged male patient diagnosed with COVID‐19
who, unfortunately, did not survive, addressing the data from the
patients admission until his expiration.  Hussain H, Fadel A, Al‐
waeli H, et al. (June 24, 2020) Coronavirus (COVID‐19)  Fulminant
Myopericarditis and Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) in
a Middle‐Aged Male Patient. Cureus 12(6): e8808.  Case  Presenta‐
tion  Clinical history A 51‐year‐old middle‐aged Italian man with
a history of hypertension presented to the  emergency  department
with a dry cough, fatigue, dyspnea, and a fever. He denied having
any travel history, chills, diaphoresis, chest pain, or change in
bowel  or  urinary  habits.  He  also  reported  having  multiple
episodes of epigastric pain and nausea  that  had  partially  im‐
proved  with  omeprazole treatment two days prior to hospitaliza‐
tion. Upon his arrival to the emergency  department,  a  physical
examination  revealed a body temperature of 39.6 C, a respiratory
rate of 26 breaths/min, a blood pressure of 141/89 mmHg, a  heart
rate  of  97  beats/min,  and  an oxygen saturation of 91% (>95%)
while the patient was breathing  ambient  air.  An  arterial  gas
analysis  indicated  a  pH of 7.44 (7.36‐7.44), an oxygen partial
pressure of 79 mmHg (75‐100 mmHg), and a carbon  dioxide  partial
pressure  of  39 mmHg (35‐45 mmHg). Auscultation of the chest un‐
covered bilateral wheezing and rhonchi. Agonal respiration and  a
symmetrical  decrease in chest expansion were noted as well.  The
complete blood count test findings were normal, except  for  lym‐
phopenia  (920  lymphocytes/microliter). Since pneumonia was sus‐
pected, the patient was started  on  oxygen  therapy,  continuous
electronic  vital  signs monitoring, an acetaminophen intravenous
(IV) drip, ceftriaxone, and vancomycin. A nasopharyngeal swab was
collected and tested for severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)
associated coronavirus using the reverse transcriptase polymerase
chain  reaction  (RT‐PCR)  method,  and a positive result was ob‐
tained. In coordination with emergency medical services, hospital
leadership  and staff decided to discontinue the patients antibi‐
otic treatments. The patient was then transferred to the airborne
isolation  unit  for clinical observation.  On the first night of
admission, the patients condition continued to worsen, and he re‐
ceived  a more comprehensive evaluation. His physical examination
revealed a respiratory rate of 29 breaths/min, a  blood  pressure
of 134/87 mmHg, a heart rate of 120 beats/min, and an oxygen sat‐
uration of 84%. The patient was started  on  continuous  positive
airway  pressure and the antiviral drug remdesivir to improve his
oxygen saturation and halt the progression of the During his sec‐
ond  day of hospitalization, the patient remained febrile (a body
temperature of 39.1 C) and hypoxemic  (an  oxygen  saturation  of
81%) and required mechanical ventilation. A posteroanterior chest
X‐ray exposed bilateral and peripheral ground‐glass  and  consol‐
idative  pulmonary opacities. These radiographic findings explain
the progressive deterioration in  the  electrocardiography,  tro‐
ponin, and creatine kinase myocardial band (CK‐MB) tests provided
normal results.  with coronavirus infection  establishing  severe
ARDS.  CT: Computer Tomography; IV: Intravenous; ARDS: Acute Res‐
piratory Distress Syndrome.   PA:  Posteroanterior;  ARDS:  Acute
Respiratory  Distress  Syndrome.  The following day, the patients
condition continued to deteriorate, and no improvements were not‐
ed.  On examination, he appeared unwell: his vital signs revealed
a body temperature of 37.8 C, a blood pressure of 138/93 mmHg,  a
heart rate of 93 beats/min, and an oxygen saturation of 83% while
he was on a ventilator. Additional medical therapies were  initi‐
ated  based on existing practice guidelines. The patients medica‐
tions were reconciled, and  hydroxychloroquine  and  azithromycin
were added. No significant improvements were noted on the follow‐
ing day.  On the fifth day of admission, a comprehensive physical
examination  presented  normal vital sign findings, except for an
oxygen  saturation  of  87%  and  a  respiratory   rate   of   26
breaths/min.   Interestingly,  the  continuous  electronic  vital
signs monitor revealed an extensive and diffuse ST‐segment eleva‐
tion  finding,  which prompted the medical team to order electro‐
cardiography, coronary angiography, and  echocardiography.  Coro‐
nary  angiography confirmed a normal supply of blood to the heart
and no signs of any arterial obstruction. However, an echocardio‐
graphy indicated an enlarged heart with a marked decrease in ven‐
tricular systolic function and an ejection fraction of 20%.  Fur‐
thermore,  elevated levels of troponin (0.29 ng/mL), creatine ki‐
nase myocardial band (CK‐MB) (20.1 ng/mL) and N‐terminal pro‐hor‐
mone  brain  natriuretic  peptide (NT‐proBNP), (BNP; 1,287 pg/mL)
were detected. These findings  suggested  acute  myopericarditis,
and  inotropic  support  (dobutamine)  was  thus initiated.  EKG:
Electrocardiography; ST: ST segment.  improvement. Physical  exam
findings  confirmed  bilateral  lower  extremity pitting edema, a
blood pressure of 130/83 mmHg, a heart rate of  88  beats/minute,
and an oxygen saturation of 89%. The patient remained on continu‐
ous mechanical ventilation and his  current  medications.   Addi‐
tionally, he was started on a nonsteroidal anti‐inflammatory drug
(NSAID; indomethacin, 50 mg t.d.s.) on the seventh day of  hospi‐
talization to treat acute myopericarditis.  Overall, the patients
medical condition deteriorated over the  following  days  of  his
hospitalization,  suggesting  no dramatic response to his current
therapy. His EKGs also continued to demonstrate  diffuse  ST‐seg‐
ment  elevation,  and  pericardial  friction rub was audible upon
cardiac auscultation. A cardiac biomarkers  laboratory  test  re‐
vealed an increase in troponin (18 ng/mL) and creatine kinase my‐
ocardial band (CK‐MB) was 14.7 ng/mL, indicating  myocardial  in‐
jury   and  recurrent  myopericarditis.  Intravenous  methylpred‐
nisolone and colchicine  were  therefore  added  to  the  current
treatment plan. Repeated echocardiogram exposed a marked decrease
in ejection fraction (23%) but no evidence of cardiac  tamponade.
Chest radiography suggested worsening of the underlying ARDS with
bilateral pleural effusion.  The patient continued to be  managed
with  aggressive  intravenous  fluid  resuscitation,  dobutamine,
NSAIDs, antibiotics, and antiviral medications.  illnesses,  from
the  common  cold  to  more severe respiratory diseases. Found in
various species, coronaviruses can produce assorted  pathological
presentations  in  each  species.  All coronavirus subgroups have
unique antigenic determinants, culturing requirements, and  anti‐
genic  crossreactions between each group, which ensure the viruss
survival and aid  in  its  transmission  and  proliferation  [1].
shape  of  Coronaviridae with the spikes.  Credit: NIAID (yellow)
emerging from the surface of the cell (blue/pink).  Credit: NIAID
second  are  known  for  their ability to infect humans and pigs,
whereas the third is detected primarily in birds [2].  The  first
two  subgroups  of  the human coronavirus contain four of the six
virus strains that infect humans, including 229E, NL63, OC43, and
HKU1,  all  of which are responsible for most coronavirus‐related
pneumonia and common cold symptoms. Severe acute respiratory syn‐
drome coronavirus (SARS‐CoV) and Middle East respiratory syndrome
coronavirus (MERS‐CoV) are responsible for  human‐related  coron‐
avirus infections less often but cause a more profound and devas‐
tating outcome [2].  Moreover, coronavirus is an enveloped, posi‐
tive‐stranded  RNA  about 80‐120 mm in diameter.  The membrane of
the virus consists of four main types of structural proteins. The
spike (S) in N‐linked glycosylated protein is responsible for the
fusion and mediation of the host cell  receptors  attachment.  In
addition,  the  membrane  (M) protein is the most abundant struc‐
tural protein that surrounds the membrane multiple times; it  has
an N‐terminal ectodomain and a cytoplasmic tail that aids in mem‐
brane curvature and nucleocapsid binding. The membrane  (E)  pro‐
tein  is a highly hydrophobic protein responsible for providing a
dense protective barrier that facilitates the  assembly  and  re‐
lease  of  virions.  Finally,  the  nucleocapsid (N) protein is a
heavily phosphorylated protein responsible for binding to the vi‐
ral  genome and forming the so‐called beads on a string structure
within the viral membrane [2].  internal helical ribonucleic acid
(RNA)‐protein  nucleocapsid  surrounded by an envelope containing
viral glycoproteins.  Nucleocapsid (N) protein is  a  phosphopro‐
tein  that is complexed with genome RNA to form the nucleocapsid.
Spike glycoprotein (S) forms  the  large  glycosylated  peplomers
that  are  characteristic  of coronaviruses. M, the transmembrane
protein, is highly hydrophobic and spans  the  membrane  multiple
times.  E,  a  membrane‐spanning protein, is a minor component of
the membrane. Some group II viruses express another glycoprotein,
hemagglutinin‐esterase  (HE), which forms smaller spikes on viri‐
ons.  Image reproduction approved by Scientific  Animation  spike
protein  [3]. After the attachment process is completed, a series
of conformational changes in the spike proteins  structure  medi‐
ates  the  fusion  between the virus and the cell membrane, which
eventually leads to the release of  the  nucleocapsids  into  the
cell. Once the viral entry process is achieved, the viral genomic
RNA begins the translation process by  utilizing  viral  replicas
polyproteins  pp1a and pp1ab [3]. These sets of proteins are then
cleaved into small subunits with the help of viral proteinase en‐
zymes.  Polymerase  enzymes  simultaneously generate several mRNA
products through discontinuous transcription to prepare  for  the
translation phase. Viral proteins and genomic RNA are subsequent‐
ly assembled and packaged into virions in the endoplasmic reticu‐
lum  and  the  Golgi apparatus of the cells. Finally, virions are
transported out of the cells by utilizing  the  vesicular  trans‐
portation  system  [3].   coronavirus  attaches  to the hosts an‐
giotensin converting enzyme (ACE2) cell receptor. Furthermore, it
highlights  the  different  steps in the replication, translation
processes and the mechanism of the drugs that have been used  re‐
cently.  These  important  steps occur with the assistance of the
hosts RNA polymerase enzymes. The products are then packaged  in‐
side the cellular compartments known as the endoplasmic reticulum
and the Golgi apparatus. After this  process  is  completed,  the
replicated  virus  utilizes the vesicle trafficking system to un‐
dergo exocytosis and infect other host cells.   RNA:  Ribonucleic
acid  Image reproduction by Gene Tex Credit: Gene Tex The virions
that escape the local immunological defense system  result  in  a
disseminated  using fine branching blood vessel networks known as
capillaries. The virus then utilizes the  bodys  natural  defense
system  to  transmit  respiratory  infections to a potential host
through droplets produced by  exhaling,  sneezing,  and  coughing
[4].  Patients  infected with coronavirus most often present with
various symptoms, including a high spiking fever, a dry cough,  a
runny  nose,  and  fatigue [4]. Other less common but more severe
symptoms  include  dyspnea,  headaches,  chest  pain,  confusion,
cyanosis,  and  restlessness. Patients can also present with non‐
specific symptoms, such as epigastric pain, diarrhea, nausea,  or
palpitations.  On rare occasions, coronaviruses can lead to death
by directly affecting the  cardiovascular  system,  inducing  my‐
opericarditis,  altering myocardial contractility, and leading to
a drastic reduction in ejection fraction [4].  The  first  coron‐
avirus  subtype  that had a destructive effect on the respiratory
system is known as severe acute respiratory  syndrome  (SARS‐CoV)
which impacted most countries around the world in 2002 [5]. Other
form of coronaviruses includes Middle East  respiratory  syndrome
(MERS‐CoV)  which began in Saudi Arabia and later spread to other
countries [6]. Severe acute respiratory coronavirus 2 (COVID‐19),
which  initially  began in China, now has been able to spread and
expand at an astonishing rate [7]. However, the most common cause
of death in patients with COVD‐19 infection is ARDS [8].  A life‐
threatening lung injury, ARDS is caused by a  disruption  in  the
hyaline  membrane and diffuse alveolar damage. This vascular dis‐
ruption results in the leakage of plasma into alveolar spaces and
causes  the  extravasation  of  the capillaries that surround the
alveoli of the lungs other respiratory symptoms  [9].  Additional
risk  factors  for ARDS include infections, trauma, pancreatitis,
sepsis, fat embolism, amniotic fluid embolism, drug overdose, and
inhaling toxic substances [9].  (ARDS) in the alveoli.  Image re‐
production approved by Health Save Blog Credit: Health Save  Blog
Unfortunately,  the  mortality rate is alarmingly high (globally,
yet  more   than   6,759,210   infected,   395,331   death/   and
2,760,840/recovered)  for  individuals  with  coronavirus‐induced
ARDS due to the complexity of the disease and its  difficulty  to
treat [9]. A minuscule proportion of patients with ARDS will suc‐
cumb to it on account of respiratory failure alone. Acute  respi‐
ratory distress syndrome generally causes secondary complications
such as sepsis or multiorgan system failure. Although no specific
treatments for this disease exist, physicians should provide sup‐
portive care therapy to treat it appropriately [9]. Patients with
COVID‐19induced  ARDS  require precise and scrupulous care, which
includes the meticulous use of sedative and neuromuscular  block‐
ing agents, personalized hemodynamic management, nutritional sup‐
port, prophylactic measures for nosocomial infections,  and  deep
venous  thrombosis  prophylaxis  and  gastrointestinal hemorrhage
[9]. As a rule, the first step in managing COVID‐19 patients with
ARDS  is  providing  proper airway management; patients are first
provided with non‐invasive ventilation support, such as  continu‐
ous  positive  airway  pressure (CPAP) or bilevel positive airway
pressure (BiPAP) to avoid the complications associated with inva‐
sive  methods  of  airway management, such as barotrauma, atelec‐
trauma, and volutrauma. Most patients are expected to require in‐
vasive  forms  of  ventilation, such as intubation and mechanical
ventilation, to control their respiratory decline and failure.  A
prone  position  and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation have re‐
cently been advocated as a form of salvage therapy for refractory
hypoxemic ARDS [9].  While managing patients with COVID‐19 infec‐
tion is an important component, it is critical to use the  appro‐
priate  diagnostic  measures.  The  diagnosis of COVID‐19 is con‐
firmed with a reverse  transcriptase  polymerase  chain  reaction
(RT‐PCR)  diagnostic  test,  a nuclear‐derived method utilized to
detect a specific genetic material from a  specific  pathogen.  A
sample  is collected from parts of the body where the coronavirus
generally resides, most commonly the nasopharynx [10]. Other  di‐
agnostic  methods, including C‐reactive protein (CRP) tests, ery‐
throcyte sedimentation rates, complete blood  counts,  comprehen‐
sive  metabolic  panels,  lactate  dehydrogenase  tests,  D‐dimer
tests, serum albumin  tests,  creatinine  tests,  cardiac  enzyme
tests,  partial  thrombin  and partial thromboplastin time tests,
liver function tests, chest X‐rays, and chest CT scans  are  used
to  not only identify the diagnosis but also predict the progres‐
sion of the disease and prognostic outcomes  [11].  Lastly,  many
drugs  have  been used in the treatment of COVID‐19 infection in‐
cluding remdesivir, chloroquine, lopiavir, ritonavir,  favilavir,
hydroxychloroquine,  azithromycin, fingolimod and others but none
of them has been showing a drastic response.  There  are  varying
degrees  of quarantine amongst countries [12].  As this case of a
middle‐aged male patient  demonstrates,  COVID‐19  infection  can
cause  nonspecific  gastrointestinal  symptoms,  life‐threatening
ARDS, and myopericarditis. The diagnosis  of  COVID‐19  was  con‐
firmed  with  the help of an RT‐PCR. Additionally, abnormal elec‐
trocardiography and echocardiography changes validated the  diag‐
nosis  of  myopericarditis.   Unlike other coronavirus infections
that mainly cause pulmonary infections, this case of  coronavirus
infection  led  to  profound cardiac damage. Although no specific
treatments are currently available, strong evidence suggests that
social  distancing,  quarantine,  and isolation produce a drastic
reduction in viral transmission, as some of epidemiologic studies
have  Additional Information Human subjects: Consent was obtained
by all participants in this study. Conflicts  of  interest:  that
they  have  no  financial  relationships at present or within the
previous three years with any organizations that  might  have  an
interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All have in‐
fluenced the submitted work.  Tyrrell DAJ, Myint SH: Coronavirus‐
es.  Medical  Microbiology.  4th edition. Baron S (ed): Weiss SR,
Navas‐Martin  S:  Coronavirus  pathogenesis  and   the   emerging
pathogen severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus. Microbiol
Mol Biol Rev. 2005, 69:635‐664.  Jiang S, Lu L, Liu Q, Xu  W,  Du
L:  Receptor‐binding domains of spike proteins of emerging or re‐
emerging viruses as targets for  development  of  antiviral  vac‐
cines.  Emerg  Microbes  Infect.   Hunt R: Corona viruses: colds,
SARS, MERS and COVID‐19 .  Microbiology  and  Immunology.   Sever
acute  respiratory  syndrome  (SARS)  . (2017). Accessed: May 20,
2017: Middle East respiratory syndrome . (2012). Accessed:  Janu‐
ary  21,  2012: Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‐19) . (2020). Ac‐
cessed: March 27, 2020: Coronavirus and COVID‐19: what you should
know  . (2020). Accessed: March 20, 2020: Diamond M, Peniston Fe‐
liciano HL, Sanghavi D, Mahapatra S: Acute  Respiratory  Distress
CDC  diagnostic test for COVID‐19 . (2020). Accessed: January 21,
2020: Lippi G, Plebbani M: Laboratory abnormalities  in  patients
with  COVID‐19  infection  .  Clin  Chem Lab Med. 2020, 10:10‐15.
10.1515/cclm‐2020‐0198 COVID‐19  prevention  and  investigational
treatments . (2020). Accessed: March 26, 2020:

