Eurasian J Med 2020; 52(2): 202-10
Neonates with COVID-19
Feride Marim1 , Dilek Karadogan2 , Tugba Sismanlar Eyuboglu3 , Nagehan Emiralioglu4 , Canan Gunduz Gurkan5
Zehra Nur Toreyin6 , Fatma Tokgoz Akyil7 , Aycan Yuksel8 , Huseyin Arikan9 , Irem Serifoglu10 ,
Tugba Ramasli Gursoy3 , Abdulsamet Sandal11 , Metin Akgun12
Eyuboglu T. Lessons Learned So Far from the Pandemic:
Eurasian J Med 2020; 52(2): 202-10.
Department of Chest Diseases, Recep Tayyip
Department of Pediatric Pulmonology, Gazi
Department of Pediatric Pulmonology Hacettepe
Department of Chest Diseases, Sureyyapasa
Chest Diseases and Thoracic Surgery Training and
Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey
Department of Occupational Health and Diseases, Adana
City Research and Training Hospital, Adana, Turkey
Department of Chest Diseases, Yedikule Chest
Diseases and Thoracic Surgery Training and
Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey
Internal Medicine Intensive Care Unit, Van, Turkey
Department of Chest Diseases Kirikhan State
Hospital, Hatay, Turkey
Department of Occupational Diseases, Ankara
Occupational and Environmental Diseases Hospital,
Ankara, Turkey
Correspondence to: Dilek Karadogan
There are concerns regarding the risk and the course of COVID-19 in pregnancy and in the neonates. In this
(SARS-CoV-2) infection during pregnancy and neonatal periods considering diagnosis, treatment, prognosis,
and prevention. Few studies on pregnant women with COVID-19 have been conducted between December
2019 and April 2020. The majority of patients applied in the third trimester and presented with fever and
cough. Ground-glass opacities and consolidation on computed tomography were reported to be common.
COVID-19 was proposed to have a milder course than SARS and the Middle East respiratory syndrome
coronavirus in pregnant women. Hydroxychloroquine and antiproteases (lopinavir/ritonavir) were reported
to be safe; however, therapeutic efficacy and safety of remdesivir still lack evidence. As ribavirin and favipiravir
have teratogenic effects, there are some debates on the use of ribavirin in severe cases. There is still no clear
evidence of vertical transmission of SARS-CoV-2 during delivery. Occupational safety issues of pregnant
healthcare workers on the frontline should be considered as their risk to develop severe pneumonia is higher
because of altered maternal immune response. Knowledge about neonatal outcomes of COVID-19 was
based on studies of the last trimester of pregnancy. There is much to be learnt about COVID-19 in pregnant
women and in the neonates, especially concerning prognosis- and treatment-related issues.
Keywords: Coronavirus disease 2019, pregnancy, neonate, vertical transmission
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a new respiratory disease caused by severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). It was reported first in Wuhan, China and
promptly spread to other countries across the world. Considering the large and rapidly rising
number of cases with COVID-19 and the resultant deaths, the outbreak has become a major
health problem in a short period of time [1]. Despite substantial data regarding the high transmission rate of the disease with a broad spectrum of severities, knowledge with respect to two
special patient groups, pregnant women and neonates, is still limited.
Previous studies have shown that COVID-19 pneumonia is more prevalent in men, and that
fewer cases in children are reported [2, 3]. However, women also experience viral infections
severely during pregnancy. Pregnancy itself alters the bodys immune system, and immunosuppression makes pregnant women susceptible to infectious diseases [4]. Thus, viral pneumonia, in
particular, is one of the important causes of deaths worldwide in pregnancy [5]. Consequently,
there are many new questions on how COVID-19 might affect the morbidity and mortality of
pregnant women and neonates.
Pregnancy and COVID-19
There have been few studies on pregnancy during COVID-19 pandemic. Between December 8,
2019 and March 20, 2020, 118 pregnant women with 8% having severe disease were reported
among COVID-19 cases in Wuhan city in China. The pregnant patients represented 0.24% of
all reported patients with COVID-19 [6]. In a study of the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) COVID-19 response team, they reported 74,439 cases with COVID-19
between February 12, 2020 and March 28, 2020 in the United States. Among 7,162 patients
Eurasian J Med 2020; 52(2): 202-10
with complete information, 143 (2%) were
pregnant and four of them admitted to the
intensive care unit (ICU) [7]. Previous data on
other coronavirus infections suggest that clinical
findings during pregnancy can range from no
symptoms to severe disease and death [8]. The
majority of pregnant patients were found to
be in the third trimester. The most common
symptoms in pregnant patients with available
data were fever and cough. Chest pain, fatigue,
dyspnea, sore throat, diarrhea, and headache
were less common symptoms [6, 8-10].
Diagnosis of COVID-19 in pregnant women
The laboratory findings in pregnant women with
COVID-19 are very similar to other COVID-19
patients. The most common laboratory finding is lymphocytopenia. Less frequently, liver
enzyme abnormality has been reported, especially increased alanine aminotransferase or/and
aspartate aminotransferase. Elevated C-reactive
protein (CRP), procalcitonin, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and interleukin-6 and D-dimer
levels can also be seen [9-12]. In a study, Liu
et al. (10) reported that the leukocytosis and
elevated neutrophil ratio were more common
in pregnants compared with the remaining
COVID-19 patients.
Chest X-ray is usually normal and is only useful
in severe pneumonia. Computed tomography
(CT) scan of chest without contrast should be
performed to confirm diagnosis in suspected
cases as the risk of radiation exposure to the
fetus is very low. The most common CT finding
is ground-glass opacity (GGO) with progression to consolidation. The lesions are generally bilateral, peripheral, and predominantly
located in the lower lobes [9, 12]. Liu et al. [10]
reported that mixed GGO with consolidation
and complete consolidation was significantly
more frequent in pregnant women compared
with the nonpregnant adults. GGO and GGO
with reticulation were more frequent in the
nonpregnant adults. Pleural effusion is rare in
COVID-19 pneumonia. Yang et al. [13] reported that pleural effusion was more common in
pregnant women than nonpregnant patients.
SARS-CoV-2 RNA is detected by reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
It is considered as the reference standard diagnostic test. Upper respiratory tract (nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs) specimens
are used for RT-PCR. In addition, lower respiratory tract (sputum, endotracheal aspirate, or
bronchoalveolar lavage), urine, and stool can be
used as specimens. If the first nasopharyngeal
test is negative but the suspicion for COVID-19
remains, the test should be repeated. COVID-
Marim et al. COVID-19 in Pregnancy and Neonates
19 can be excluded if RT-PCRs of swabs are
negative twice in a row (sampling interval 24
h). Serology should be used as a diagnostic procedure only if RT-PCR is not available [12, 14].
COVID-19 is an atypical disease that is difficult
to diagnose at early phases. False-negative tests
on initial testing appear to be common. CT has
been reported to be superior in early diagnosis
compared with RT-PCR [15].
Treatment of pregnant women with COVID-19
Numerous data support that COVID-19 has a
better course in pregnant women compared
with SARS and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) [16, 17]. In
mild or uncomplicated COVID-19 infection,
follow up of pregnant women without treatment should be considered primarily. There is
no definitive treatment regimen for pregnant
women that has been proven useful and safe.
Some of the investigational drugs are recommended for treatment. It is important to
carefully weigh the benefits of interventions
for the mother and fetus with potential risks if
Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine have
been found effective in SARS-Cov-2 in in vitro
studies. Although hydroxychloroquine crosses
the placenta, there are studies reporting that
it can be safely used in pregnant women in all
trimesters [18-20]. However, maternal side
effects such as QT prolongation and ventricular
tachycardia can occur.
Particularly, in China and Turkey, antiprotease
drugs, lopinavir/ritonavir (200 mg/50 mg per
capsule), are used in the antiviral treatment. It is
known to be safe in pregnant women. Oral use
is recommended for 1014 days, two capsules
twice a day [14, 21]. It crosses the placenta and
may increase the risk for preterm delivery. It is
recommended to be taken together with nebulized -interferon inhalation (5 million IU in 2
mL of sterile water for injection) in China [14].
Remdesivir is a novel nucleotide analog that
is known to inhibit SARS-CoV-2 virus in vitro
[22]. Although there is not enough information
about its safety and efficacy, it has been used
in pregnant patients with severe COVID-19.
Clinical studies searching for alternative treatment solutions are ongoing [12, 14]. Although
investigational drugs ribavirin and favipiravir are
known as teratogenic, some studies have suggested the use ribavirin in therapy [12, 16, 21].
Lung damage due to COVID-19 increases
the risk for secondary bacterial pneumonia.
Antibiotics are recommended for those with
findings of suspicion of bacterial pneumonia.
Intravenous ceftriaxone can be used in pregnant
women until specific culture results are evident
The use of steroids is not highly recommended
as it has been reported to increase the risk
of mortality in influenza and delayed virus
clearance in MERS-CoV. Short-term (three
to five days) methylprednisolone 12 mg/kg is
recommended to protect from acute respiratory distress syndrome only in patients with
severe pneumonia. The same treatment regimen is recommended for pregnant women
with COVID 19 [14, 23, 24]. If preterm labor is
expected, antenatal betamethasone is also recommended for promoting fetal lung maturity in
pregnant women with suspected or confirmed
COVID-19 [25]. Sufficient information about
the use of tocilizumab and convalescent plasma
in treating pregnant women with COVID-19 is
not available.
Both pregnancy and COVID-19 are associated with increased risk for thrombosis [26].
Suspected and confirmed COVID-19 pregnant
women should receive prophylactic low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) before and after
delivery. If the delivery is very close, unfractionated heparin should be preferred instead
of LMWH, since it can be readily reversed.
It is recommended to continue prophylactic
LMWH for at least 10 days after discharge from
the hospital in confirmed COVID-19 pregnant
women [14, 27].
Support therapies in the service and ICUs are
similar in pregnant and nonpregnant patients. It
is recommended to regulate the oxygen supplement in pregnant women to ensure that peripheral saturation is 95%. In order to maintain
oxygen diffusion from the placenta to the fetus,
the maternal partial pressure of oxygen in the
blood gas should be above 70 mmHg [21, 28].
Pregnancy complications
In some studies, premature rupture of membranes, preterm delivery, and coagulopathy
accompanied by liver dysfunction and death of
the mother have been reported in pregnant
39% preterm delivery (<37 weeks) and 96%
cesarean delivery were reported in 51 pregnant
women [30]. In addition, Elshafeey et al. [31],
reported 15% preterm delivery (<37 weeks) and
70% cesarean delivery in 252 pregnant women in
of spontaneous abortion does not increase [31,
32]. There are studies reporting that pregnancy
or delivery does not cause progression in disease
symptoms and CT findings [5, 9].
204  Marim et al. COVID-19 in Pregnancy and Neonates
There are no data on the relationship between
obstetric diseases, such as preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, and COVID-19. Given the
fact that pandemic creates anxiety and stress,
pregnant women can experience side effects of
anxiety and stress, such as preeclampsia, depression, preterm delivery, increased nausea, and
vomiting. In another aspect, pregnant women
may request early termination and elective
cesarean surgery in order to prevent disease
transmission from healthcare settings to themselves or their families during visits [33].
Delivery and postpartum care
Timing of delivery, delivery process, and prenatal and postnatal follow-ups for pregnant with
suspected or confirmed COVID-19 should be
managed by a multidisciplinary team. In severe
and critical cases, if the safety of the mother and
her baby is at risk, pregnancy can be terminated
early, even if the baby is premature. There is
no evidence that one mode of delivery is superior to another in terms of risks associated with
COVID-19. Therefore, unless the clinical severity
and respiratory status of the pregnant require
urgent intervention, the mode of delivery should
be decided without considering COVID-19. In
appropriate patients, vaginal delivery may be
considered [14, 27]. No evidence of vertical
transmission of COVID-19 from the placenta
or during delivery has been demonstrated [34].
COVID-19 tests have resulted negative in babies
of COVID-19 mothers who had cesarean or
vaginal delivery in different studies. It has been
shown that the mode of delivery is not effective
in transmission [5, 11, 35]. Liu et al. [5] found
that pregnancy and delivery did not exacerbate
symptoms and CT findings of COVID-19 pneumonia. Yang et al. [13] also showed that there
was no difference before and after delivery in
terms of CRP, white blood cell count, neutrophil
and lymphocyte count, and proportion in pregnant women with COVID-19.
Before delivery, all pregnant patients should
be taken to separate isolated rooms. Contact
and air isolation measures should be followed
during delivery and antenatal and postpartum
periods. Healthcare workers (HCWs) must
also wear personal protective equipment (PPE).
PPE should always be a priority, even in emergent cesareans or interventions. Relatives of
the pregnant should be informed about possible delays of cesarean section because of the
period for preparations and to equip healthcare
staff with adequate PPE. After delivery, mother
and baby should be taken to separate isolated rooms and should be closely monitored.
Isolation should be continued at home after
discharge [13, 14, 27].
Eurasian J Med 2020; 52(2): 202-10
Generally, mild or uncomplicated COVID-19 infection occurs in pregnant women. COVID-19 in pregnant
women has a better course than SARS and MERS-CoV.
The leukocytosis and elevated neutrophil ratio were reported more common in pregnant women than
nonpregnant patients.
CT has also been reported to be superior in early diagnosis compared with RT-PCR in pregnant or nonpregnant patients. In CT scans, mixed GGO with consolidation and complete consolidation was reported
significantly more frequent in pregnant women. The frequency of pleural effusion is also higher than that in
nonpregnant patients.
Different antiviral treatments have been used in pregnant women, but there is no definitive treatment
regimen with proven efficacy.
If preterm delivery is expected, antenatal betamethasone is recommended for promoting fetal lung maturity.
Owing to the increased thrombotic risk, thromboprophylaxis is strongly recommended before and after
Delivery has not been shown to cause COVID-19 progression and worsening clinical and laboratory findings.
It was observed that the mode of delivery was not effective in the transmission of COVID-19.
Unless clinical necessity or urgent interventions are required, the mode of delivery should be decided
without considering COVID-19.
All isolation and protective measures must be carefully followed to prevent transmission of COVID-19
before, during, and after delivery.
Antepartum and postpartum anxiety and depression risk is high in pregnant women, and they should be
followed closely for psychological support.
The top priority is to prevent COVID-19 in healthy pregnant women. Therefore, all necessary protective
measures and hygiene rules must be observed.
Pregnant healthcare workers should be employed outside the COVID-19 wards or work from home.
COVID-19: Coronavirus disease 2019; SARS: Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2; MERS-CoV: Middle East
respiratory syndrome coronavirus; CT: computed tomography; RT-PCR: reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction;
GGO: ground glass opacity
The probability of anxiety and depression
increases as mothers support for their relatives will decrease, and their delivery plans
will change owing to the pandemic. Mothers
may also be worried about their babies being
infected, and postpartum vaccination and follow
up may be impaired. If necessary, mothers can
be informed about their concerns, and psychological support should be provided by telephone
or by other non-face-to-face methods [33].
Prevention of COVID-19 in pregnant women
Although significant process has been achieved
in the development of COVID-19 vaccine, an
effective vaccine has not been introduced yet.
Antenatal care is important. Therefore, regular
visits should be done as advised by the obstetrician. Unnecessary traveling, use of public transportation and contact with sick people should
be avoided in pregnant women. It is important
that they follow personal and social hygiene rules.
Pregnant women with symptoms and suspicious
history of travel or contact should be quickly isolated in healthcare units and be tested [8, 14, 27].
Pregnant healthcare workers
Pregnancy leads to altered maternal immunity,
and pregnant HCWs on the frontline have high
risk to develop COVID-19 given the fact that
the risk is associated with duration and intensity
of exposure as well as immune condition of the
host. Therefore, pregnant HCWs should be
assigned outside of the COVID-19 wards in
order to decrease the risk of transmission. In
addition, those with comorbid conditions such as
heart disease should be consulted by their obstetricians and considered to work from home [36].
Highlights of COVID-19 infection in pregnant
Intrauterine transmission of COVID-19
COVID-19 infection may have a risk of vertical transmission, like previously seen in SARS,
because of the widely expression of angiotensin
converting enzyme-2 receptor in the placenta.
This possibility can be explained with the similar
receptor-binding domain structures shared by
SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2. Consequently,
the risk of vertical transmission for COVID-19
might be as low as that was reported for SARSCoV-1 infection [37].
Recently, higher risk of preterm birth within
pregnant women was reported from China.
There was one case of intrauterine fetal death
and one case of neonatal death with respiratory distress and disseminated intravascular
coagulation (DIC). In contrast, the samples
for COVID-19 virus of the baby born from an
infected mother were negative [5, 11, 12, 35,
37]. Most recently, two neonates from COVID19 infected mothers had positive results for
SARS-CoV-2 following delivery. One of these
Eurasian J Med 2020; 52(2): 202-10
cases has been confirmed at 17 days after birth,
and this baby had a close contact history with
two other confirmed cases (her mother and
caregiver); the other case has been confirmed
at 36 h after birth, and the possibility of close
contact history could not be excluded. There
are few reports demonstrating the absence of
viral isolates in the amniotic fluid, cord blood,
breast milk, and neonatal throat swabs in a
subset of patients born from infected mothers
[38-42]. However, three neonates demonstrated elevated SARS-CoV-2 immunoglobulin
M (Ig M) antibodies increasing the concern
of vertical transmission, although repeated
nasopharyngeal samples from the infants were
negative [9, 14, 43].
Despite these concerns, there is still no evidence of vertical transmission of SARS-CoV-2
during delivery. Larger data are needed to
exclude transplacental vertical transmission of
Intrauterine complications
No information is available either about the
effect of COVID-19 on fetal malformations,
fetal growth abnormalities, and organ maturation and or about the transmission of infection
across the placenta in the first and second trimesters of pregnancy.
Previous studies have demonstrated that SARSCoV-1 infection during perinatal period is associated with high prevalence of maternal and
neonatal effects, including DIC, abortion, preterm birth, intrauterine growth retardation, and
neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) admission
with COVID-19 and their neonates had less
problems compared with SARS-CoV-1 infection. Fetal complications of COVID-19 have
been reported as preterm birth (3947%),
intrauterine growth restriction (10%), and
abortion (2%) according to recent literature.
Respiratory insufficiency in pregnant women
increases the risk of fetal growth restriction
owing to maternal hypoxia, placental hypoperfusion, and reduced oxygen delivery to the fetus
[46]. Zhu et al. [35] also reported that perinatal
COVID-19 infection may have adverse effects
on neonates, causing problems such as fetal
distress and premature birth.
In a retrospective study, Zhang et al. [47]
have compared the effect of COVID-19 on
pregnancy outcomes and neonatal prognosis
between 16 women infected with COVID-19
and 45 women without COVID-19. There
were no significant differences in fetal distress,
Marim et al. COVID-19 in Pregnancy and Neonates
meconium-stained amniotic fluid, preterm birth,
and neonatal asphyxia between the two groups.
The World Health Organization (WHO) does
not recommend the routine use of systemic
corticosteroids because of delaying viral clearance, although they do not cross the placenta.
However, in terms of preterm delivery, the
decision of using corticosteroids to induce fetal
maturity and to minimize peripartum complications should be individualized. Recent studies
have defined remdesivir and chloroquine as
strong candidate drugs for the treatment of
COVID-19 that are safe in pregnant women.
Although chloroquine crosses the placenta, it
may be safely used in all trimesters of pregnancy
with no increased risk of adverse perinatal outcomes. Viral protease inhibitors such as lopinavir
and ritonavir are also safe in the management
of COVID-19, and they have no risk of fetal
anomalies, preterm birth, or low birth weight in
infants reported up to date [42].
Ribavirin, an antiviral guanosine analog commonly used in coronavirus treatment, is teratogenic and induces miscarriage, craniofacial, and
limb defects in the embryos of pregnant mice.
It should be avoided in early pregnancy [42].
Another drug, alpha interferon in early pregnancy, has the risk of fetal growth restriction
and developmental delay [48].
The treatment response of mothers clinical
condition will improve the fetal status. As long
as the pregnant women have good response to
the treatment, pregnancies should be allowed
to continue to term. However, if a pregnant
woman is critically ill, her clinical deterioration
may lead to intrauterine fetal death or loss of
both mother and the infant. In these conditions,
early delivery may be warranted. The indications for early delivery depend on the mothers
clinical status, gestational age, and fetal wellbeing condition [48].
Neonatal management after delivery
Available data are insufficient about the optimal mode of delivery for infected mothers,
considering both maternal morbidity and infection risk to neonate. The mode of delivery
should be decided based on obstetric factors
and clinical emergency. Although recent data
do not establish a risk of vertical transmission,
early cord clamping and avoiding skin-to-skin
contact following delivery are still suggested.
Samples, including vaginal secretions, umbilical
cord blood, amniotic fluid, placenta, and neonatal throat swab, should be collected during
delivery to determine the potential intrauterine
vertical transmission of COVID-19. However,
infection may develop in neonates via close contact [48-51]. Because there is the close contact
between mother and child, the mother should
wear a face mask to reduce the risk of droplet
transmission [51].
Optimal management in the delivery room
is important for further follow up of these
neonates. Delivery should be performed in
a negative pressure room whenever possible. Obstetricians and pediatricians should be
in closed cooperation, and the neonatologist
should be informed at least 30 min before any
planned delivery. Clinicians should use airborne,
droplet, and contact precautions because of
increased maternal virus aerosol transmission
and should be prepared for possible intubation,
airway suction, and positive pressure ventilation
interventions. Regarding neonatal management
of suspected, probable, and confirmed cases
of maternal COVID-19 infection, the umbilical
cord should be clamped promptly, and the neonate should be transferred to the resuscitation
room [50, 51].
Routine neonatal care and the initial steps of
neonatal resuscitation, including drying, tactile
stimulation, assessment of heart rate, placement
of pulse oximetry, and electrocardiograph leads,
are unlikely to be aerosol-generating. Suction
of the airway after delivery should not be performed routinely for clear or meconium-stained
amniotic fluid. Suctioning is an aerosol-generating
procedure and is not indicated for uncomplicated
deliveries. Endotracheal instillation of medications, such as surfactant or epinephrine, includes
aerosol-generating procedures. Intravenous delivery of epinephrine by umbilical venous catheter
is the preferred route of administration during
neonatal resuscitation. The neonate should be
placed in an incubator instead of radiant warmer
during the postnatal care [50].
Neonates of the suspected COVID-19-infected
mother should be transferred to the neonatal
isolation room immediately if they are in good
general condition. Mother and neonate should
be separated to minimize the risk of postnatal infant infection from maternal respiratory
secretions. Neonates should be bathed as soon
as possible after birth to remove virus potentially present on the skin surfaces. If the maternal
nucleic acid test is negative for two consecutive
tests, the neonate may be transferred out of
the isolation room. The contact precautions
and use of PPE should be provided during the
postpartum period, until the mother tests are
negative for COVID-19 [48-50]. First molecular
assay testing should be done at 24 h of age, and
repeat testing should be done at 48 h of age.
206  Marim et al. COVID-19 in Pregnancy and Neonates
If the maternal nucleic acid test is positive or
if a maternal infection is confirmed, neonates
should be isolated for at least 14 days. The neonate and the mother with confirmed COVID19 should be isolated in different rooms, and
they should be screened very carefully. The
neonate should be closely monitored for clinical
manifestations of infection.
The frequency of NICU admission was also
low according to recent reports. However, the
neonates requiring NICU should be admitted
to a single negative pressure patient room (or
other air filtration systems). Airborne, droplet, and contact precautions should be taken
for the care of neonates requiring continious
positive airway pressure (CPAP) or any form of
mechanical ventilation [49-51].
COVID-19 in neonates
Life is a flame that is always burning itself out, but
it catches fire again every time a child is born. 
George Bernard Shaw
Knowledge about neonatal outcomes of
COVID-19 is very limited and based on studies that are observed in the last trimester of
pregnancy. Both SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV
have been found to cause severe complications
in pregnant women and neonates; however,
SARS-CoV-2 seems to cause milder complications [52-58]. Immaturity of innate and adaptive
immune system makes the neonates highly
vulnerable to infections [59]. Dysregulation
of factors, such as cytokines and complement
cascade, and also some treatments given to
mothers or neonates, such as high dose corticosteroids, can have detrimental consequences
on brain development and function [44, 57, 58].
Fortunately, majority of neonates born to mother with COVID-19 did not become infected and
had very few symptoms at birth, and to date,
very few neonates have been reported that
have affected by COVID-19.
December 8, 2019 and April 1, 2020) examining 108 pregnancies, neonatal data were
obtained from 86 deliveries, and 22 women
were still pregnant at study time. Of these,
one intrauterine fetal death and one neonatal
death were reported. Despite eight neonates
had symptoms and clinical findings, such as fever,
thrombocytopenia, vomiting, and pneumonia,
they recovered in a short time and were discharged from hospital [44]. In a case control
study where 16 COVID-19 confirmed pregnant
women and 18 COVID-19 suspected pregnant
women were included, maternal and neonatal
complications were compared with 242 preg-
nant women without COVID-19 who delivered
in 2019 and 2020. COVID-19 was not detected
in neonates, and no severe neonatal complications were observed [45].
COVID-19 continues to spread worldwide.
Since the information is limited only to the last
period of pregnancy, it should be emphasized
how to approach the neonates. Owing to the
potential risk of infection, neonates born from
an infected mother should be evaluated in this
COVID-19 diagnosis in neonates
Baby born to mother with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 should be assessed clinically,
and tests should be performed for identifying
SARS-CoV-2. Neonates with COVID-19 may
be asymptomatic or may have respiratory and
gastrointestinal symptoms. Fever, tachycardia,
vomiting, lymphocytopenia, thrombocytopenia,
abnormal liver function, neonatal pneumonia,
multiple organ failure, and DIC were reported
in very few neonates till now [44, 45].
There are different recommendations for testing time and methods for COVID-19 in neonates with several limitations. Diagnosis of fetal/
neonatal infections are based on the detection
of the organism in culture or nucleic acid
amplification tests or body fluid samples that
identify the presence of the RNA or DNA of
the pathogen in amniotic fluid before birth or
in appropriately collected fetal/neonatal tissues,
or histopathologically showing the organism
in fetal/neonatal tissues. In addition, serology
is used for certain congenital infections such
as toxoplasmosis, cytomegalovirus, and herpes
simplex virus. Antigen detection and rapid
molecular diagnostic tests are also available,
but they have several limitations and may have
suboptimal sensitivity in ruling out disease [60].
RT-PCR-based assays performed in a laboratory on respiratory specimens are the reference standards for COVID-19 diagnosis having
71% sensitivity [60, 61]. To date, since maternal
infections were observed in the late phase of
pregnancy, there may not have been sufficient
time for the generation of antibodies. Thus, the
use of serology in the diagnosis of neonate is
still controversial. Three neonates with elevated
SARS-CoV-2 IgM despite negative molecular
testing have been reported [62, 63]. Following
negative and positive results along with cross
reactivity and testing challenges were pointed
Currently, RT-PCR is noted as the gold standard
test for diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 [65]. A clas-
Eurasian J Med 2020; 52(2): 202-10
sification system based on sample site, method,
and timing was suggested for neonatal SARSCoV-2 infections such as congenital infection
in live born room neonate, neonatal-infectionacquired intrapartum, and neonatal-infectionacquired postpartum [66]. Congenital infection
in live born neonate could be defined in neonate and mother with SARS-Cov-2 infection
with/without clinical features of infection and
confirmed by detection of the virus by RT-PCR
in umbilical cord blood or neonatal blood collected within first 12 h of birth or amniotic
fluid collected prior to rupture of membrane.
Neonatal-infection-acquired intrapartum could
be defined in neonate and mother with SARSCov-2 infection with/without clinical features
of infection and confirmed by detection of the
virus by RT-PCR in nasopharyngeal swab at
birth (collected after cleaning the baby) and at
2448 h of age, and other explanations should
be excluded in symptomatic babies. Neonatalinfection-acquired postpartum could be defined
in neonate at older than 48 h of age with clinical
features of infection, and parent or caregiver
may or may not have SARS-CoV-2 infection or
were not tested. The diagnosis could be confirmed by detection of the virus by RT-PCR in
nasopharyngeal/rectal swab in at least 48 h after
the birth and when respiratory sample tested
negative by PCR at birth [66].
Usually, neonatal testing is recommended in the
first 1224 h after birth, while earlier test is
likely to reflect maternal infection. In addition,
a second test is recommended 24 h after the
first test to confirm result. Subsequent testing
is recommended if baby becomes unwell, after
maternal test negative result or as recommended by infectious disease team [67]. Single swab
that samples first oropharynx and then nasopharynx should be used for collecting. Rectal
swab testing may be considered if available
in centers, especially for sick infants requiring
prolonged hospital care [68]. Two consecutive
negative tests 24 h apart are considered as
clearance. Swab is preferably obtained in a negative pressure room or in isolation with adequate
PPE, which should include fit-tested mask/powered air-purifying respirator (PAPR) or goggles
with an N95 mask plus gown and gloves. After
obtaining the sample, PPE should be discarded,
and the room should be cleaned [65].
Symptomatic neonates should be evaluated in
terms of symptoms and examination findings.
Complete blood count, liver, and renal function
tests, if needed coagulation parameters, and
other tests considered according to the neonates findings could be performed. If a neonate
with COVID-19 exhibits respiratory symptoms,
Eurasian J Med 2020; 52(2): 202-10
chest X-ray is performed; however, radiological
features of COVID-19 in neonates have not
been well characterized [69].
Although most of the studies did not find any
evidence for intrauterine transmission, radiological findings, lymphocytopenia and thrombocytopenia, have been repeatedly reported
in healthy seen babies born to SARS-CoV-2infected women. Therefore, clinicians should
closely monitor the neonates born from mothers with COVID-19 infection.
Treatment, discharge, and follow up of
neonates with COVID-19
Currently, there is no definitive treatment for
COVID-19 in neonates. Treatment options
are based on adult studies that have contradictory results. Treatment options such as
hydroxychloroquine/chloroquine, azithromycin,
lopinavir/ritonavir, remdesivir, corticosteroids,
and tocilizumab were recommended in adult
patients according to patients condition [70].
Unfortunately, there is no randomized controlled trial for neonates and children. Most
of the neonates and children do not need
treatment, and treatment decision is based on
the clinical status of children. Symptomatic and
supportive care can be given in children with
upper respiratory tract infection, pharyngitis,
and acute gastroenteritis. Supplementation of
oxygen, maintenance of waterelectrolyte, and
acidbase balance are the mainstay of therapy
for patients with COVID-19. If severe acute
respiratory distress syndrome is present in neonate, high-dose pulmonary surfactant, inhaled
nitric oxide, high-frequency oscillatory ventilation, and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation may be useful [39]. There is no evidence
supporting that administration of immunoglobulins, antivirals, and steroids improves outcomes
of neonates with severe COVID-19. Ivermectin,
plasma infusion, and dornase alpha are other
candidates that may be proposed for treatment;
however, there is no evidence for use in children
especially in neonates [71, 72].
Infants under investigation and symptomatic
neonates should be cared for in an isolated
room if a negative pressure room is not available. Contact and droplet precautions should
continue if infant is undergoing aerosol-generating procedures, such as intubation/extubation, CPAP, and deep suctioning, in which case
airborne precautions (PAPR or N95 mask plus
goggles, gown, and gloves) are indicated [69]. If
there are some opinions about contact with
mother and separation. The decision should
be made on a case-by-case basis using shared
Marim et al. COVID-19 in Pregnancy and Neonates
decision-making between the mother and the
clinical team. Clinical condition and SARS-CoV-2
testing results of mother and baby, desire of
mother to feed at the breast, facility capacity to
accommodate separation or colocation, and the
ability to maintain separation upon discharge
and other risks and benefits of temporary separation of a mother with known or suspected
COVID-19 and her infant should be considered
[73]. If separation is not undertaken, other
measures to reduce the risk of transmission
from mother to infant should be considered,
such as using physical barriers such as curtains
between the mother and neonate and keeping
the baby at least 2 m away from the mother. If
mother is breastfeeding or not breastfeeding,
but there is no other healthy person present in
the room, she must use face mask and practice
hand hygiene before each feeding and other
close contact with her neonate [73]. If temporary separation is undertaken, infants with
suspected COVID-19 should be isolated from
other healthy infants. If another healthy family or staff member is present to provide care
such as diapering, bathing, and feeding for the
neonate, they should use PPE. For healthy family members, appropriate PPE includes gown,
gloves, face mask, and eye protection [73].
Well neonates or neonates completed the
treatment should be discharged from the birth
hospital based on the centers normal criteria.
Infected infants confirmed with molecular tests
(or whose condition cannot be determined
because of lack of testing), but without symptoms of COVID-19, can be discharged on a
case-by-case basis with appropriate measures
and frequent outpatient follow-up contacts
(telephone, telemedicine, or in-office) within
14 days after delivery. All caregivers should
use PPE, and uninfected individuals above 60
years of age and individuals with comorbid
conditions should not care these neonates [68].
Infants with a negative SARS-CoV-2 molecular
test should be best discharged to the care of
a designated healthy (noninfected) caregiver. If
the mother is in the same house, she should
maintain a distance of at least 2 m for as long as
possible, and when she is close to the neonate,
she should use a mask and hand hygiene for
neonate care up to mother without fever for
72 h without using antipyretic, improvements
of symptoms, and has negative results from
a molecular assay for detecting SARS-CoV-2
from at least two consecutive nasopharyngeal
swab samples collected at 24-h intervals, or
another family member may care the baby in
this time period [66, 68]. Other caregivers in
the home who are under observation for the
development of COVID-19 should use standard
procedure masks and hand hygiene and should
be 2 m away from the neonate until their condition is resolved [68]. After discharge of baby
from hospital, a check-up and pharyngeal swab
for SARS-CoV-2 should be received at the 14th
day, and neonatal COVID-19 follow up could be
stopped on the 28th day after discharge if the
the suggested management for neonates who
were born from COVID-19 infected mothers.
Breastfeeding has several lifelong benefits.
Breastfeeding shapes the developing neonatal
gut microbiota at an early age, both through
exposure of the neonate directly to breast milk
microbiota and, indirectly, through breast milk
factors and bioactive substances that affect
bacterial growth and metabolism [75]. Multiple
studies have shown that breastfeeding not only
reduces the risk of death and illness in early
life, but also has permanent health benefits
throughout adult life. Moreover, long-term and
exclusive breastfeeding has been associated
with improved cognitive development in infants
[76]. To date, there has been no evidence showing viral transmission to neonates via human
milk could not be proven; however, contagion
by droplets and by contact with the respiratory
secretions of infected people should not be
ignored [11, 74, 77]. The CDC recommends to
mothers to decide with other family members
and healthcare providers how to start and
continue breastfeeding. If the mother is sick
and chooses to direct breastfeed, they recommend wearing a face mask and washing hands
before each feeding. In addition, if the mother
is sick and chooses to express breast milk, they
recommend expressing breast milk to establish
and maintain milk supply, providing a dedicated
breast pump, washing hands before touching
any pump or bottle parts and before expressing
breast milk, after each use, cleaning all parts that
come into contact with breast milk, and, if possible, considering having someone who is well
feed the expressed breast milk to the infant are
recommended [78].
The safety of breastfeeding when mother is
on a COVID-19 treatment with diverse drugs
should be evaluated. However, there are no
data regarding the use of some of the medications. One of the drugs used in treatment is
remdesivir. There are ongoing studies about
this issue, and nothing is known about the use
of remdesivir in pregnancy and passage into the
breastmilk [69, 79]. Hydroxychloroquine is a
potential treatment option in COVID-19, and it
208  Marim et al. COVID-19 in Pregnancy and Neonates
Delivery should be performed in a negative pressure room whenever possible, and mother should wear a
face mask to reduce the risk of droplet transmission during delivery.
Recent data do not prove the risk of vertical transmission; however, early cord clamping is suggested, and
skin-to-skin contact should be avoided following delivery.
Neonate should be transferred to the resuscitation room and neonatal care, and the initial steps of neonatal
resuscitation, including drying, tactile stimulation, assessment of heart rate, placement of pulse oximetry,
and electrocardiograph leads, should be routinely performed.
Suction of the airway after delivery should not be performed routinely for clear or meconium-stained
amniotic fluid.
Endotracheal instillation of medications includes aerosol-generating procedures and should be performed
The neonate should be placed in an incubator instead of radiant warmer during the postnatal care.
Mother and neonate should be separated to minimize the risk of postnatal infant infection.
Neonate should be bathed as soon as possible after birth to remove virus potentially present on skin surfaces.
If the maternal nucleic acid test is positive or if a maternal infection is confirmed, neonates should be
isolated for at least 14 days. The neonate and the mother with confirmed COVID-19 should be isolated in
different rooms.
The neonate should be closely monitored for clinical manifestations of infection during isolation.
If the maternal nucleic acid test is negative for two consecutive tests, the neonate may be transferred out
of the isolation room.
For neonates, first molecular assay testing (RT-PCR) should be done at 24 h of age, and repeat testing
should be done at 48 h of age.
The contact precautions and use of personal protection equipment should be provided during the postpartum period, until the mother tests are negative for COVID-19.
Neonates requiring NICU should be admitted to a single negative pressure patient room (or other air
filtration systems).
Airborne, droplet, and contact precautions should be taken for the care of neonates requiring CPAP or any
form of mechanical ventilation.
Symptomatic neonates should be evaluated according to symptoms and examination findings. Chest X-ray,
complete blood count, liver, and renal function tests, if needed coagulation parameters, and other tests
should be considered.
Most of the neonates and children do not need treatment, and treatment decision is based on the clinical
status of children.
If separation of mother and neonate is not undertaken, measures to reduce the risk of transmission from
mother to infant should be considered, such as using physical barriers such as curtains between the mother
and neonate and keeping the baby at least 2 m away from the mother.
There is no evidence showing viral transmission to neonates via human milk. If the mother sick and chooses
to direct breastfeed, mother should wear a face mask and wash hands before each feeding.
If the mother is sick and chooses to express breast milk, it may be provided by a dedicated breast pump.
Wash hands before touching any pump or bottle parts and before expressing breast milk, and after each
use, clean all parts that come into contact with breast milk. In addition, if possible, consider having someone
who is well feed the expressed breast milk to the infant.
Well neonates or neonates completed the treatment should be discharged from the birth hospital based on
the centers normal criteria.
Infants who are found to be infected with molecular tests (or whose condition cannot be determined
because of lack of testing), but without symptoms of COVID-19, can be discharged on a case-by-case
basis with appropriate measures and frequent outpatient follow-up contacts (telephone, telemedicine, or
in-office) within 14 days after delivery. All caregivers should use PPE and uninfected individuals above 60
years of age, and individuals with comorbid conditions should not care these neonates.
COVID-19: Coronavirus disease 2019; RT-PCR: reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction; NICU: neonatal intensive
care unit; CPAP: continious positive airway pressure; PPE: personal protective equipment
[80]. Ritonavir/lopinavir is an antiviral treatment
used in HIV infection, and experience with
ritonavir/lopinavir during breastfeeding is limited and mostly for HIV infection. In the United
States, avoiding breastfeeding is recommended;
feasible, sustainable, and safe replacement feeding is available, WHO guidelines recommend
that all women with an HIV infection who are
pregnant or breastfeeding should be maintained
on antiretroviral therapy for at least the duration of risk for mother-to-child transmission
[81-84]. No recommendation is available for
COVID-19 now. For azithromycin, lower levels
in breast milk, and higher doses used in infants,
it is not expected to cause adverse effects in
breastfed infants [85]. Manufacturers suggest
that the decision to breastfeed during azithromycin therapy should be considered according
to the risk of infant exposure, the benefits of
Eurasian J Med 2020; 52(2): 202-10
breastfeeding to the infant, and benefits of
treatment to the mother [86]. Corticosteroids
in normal doses in lactating women; however, it
is recommended to monitor the nursing baby
[87]. Little information is present about tocilizumab, and it is recommended to be used with
caution during breastfeeding. The risk of infant
exposure, the benefits of breastfeeding to the
infant, and benefits of treatment to the mother
should be considered [88, 89]. It should be kept
in mind that there are no data available about
the effect of all these treatments on breastfeeding in COVID-19, and care should be taken in
these terms.
In conclusion, although COVID-19 in pregnants and neonates has not been associated
with severe disease or worse clinical outcomes
so far, the availability of limited data on this
topic should be emphasized. Thus, it is possible that all approaches can be changed and
renewed. Updated information in diagnosis and
new treatment approaches for these vulnerable
groups of patients should be considered. As
Voltaire has stated: It is said that the present is
pregnant with the future.
N.E., C.G.G., Z.N.T., F.T.A., A.Y., H.A., I.S., T.R.G., A.S.,
M.A.; Design - F.M., D.K., T.S.E., N.E., C.G.G., Z.N.T.,
F.T.A., A.Y., H.A., I.S., T.R.G., A.S., M.A.; Supervision F.M., D.K., T.S.E., N.E., C.G.G., Z.N.T., F.T.A., A.Y., H.A.,
I.S., T.R.G., A.S., M.A.; Resources - F.M., D.K., T.S.E.,
N.E., F.T.A.; Materials - F.M., D.K., T.S.E., N.E., F.T.A.;
Data Collection and/or Processing - F.M., D.K., T.S.E.,
N.E.; Analysis and/or Interpretation - F.M., D.K., T.S.E.,
N.E., C.G.G., F.T.A., A.Y.; Literature Search - F.M., D.K.,
interest to declare.
study has received no financial support.
World Health Organization. Situation report-17
situation in numbers total and new cases in last
pdf?sfvrsn=17f0dca_2 accessed February 7,
Chen N, Zhou M, Dong X, et al. Epidemiological
and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019
novel coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China:
a descriptive study. Lancet 2020; 395: 507-13.
Eurasian J Med 2020; 52(2): 202-10
Yang Y, Lu Q, Liu M, et al. Epidemiological and
Mor G, Cardenas I, Abrahams V, et al. Inflammation and pregnancy: the role of the immune
system at the implantation site. Ann N Y Acad
Sci 2011; 1221: 80-7. [Crossref]
Liu W, Wang Q, Zhang Q, et al. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) during pregnancy: A case
NEJMc2009226. [Crossref]
Chow N, Fleming-Dutra K, Gierke R, et al. Preliminary estimates of the prevalence of selected
underlying health conditions among patients
with coronavirus disease 2019- United States,
February 12-March 28, 2020. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep 2020; 69: 382-6. [Crossref]
Rasmussen SA, Smulian JC, Lednicky JA, et al.
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) and
pregnancy: what obstetricians need to know. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 2020; 222: 415-26. [Crossref]
Panahi L, Amiri M, Pouy S. Risks of Novel Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) in Pregnancy; a
Liu H, Liu F, Li J, et al. Clinical and CT imaging
features of the COVID-19 pneumonia: Focus on
pregnant women and children. J Infect 2020; 80:
e7-13. [Crossref]
Chen H, Guo J, Wang C, et al. Clinical characteristics and intrauterine vertical transmission
records. Lancet 2020; 395: 809-15. [Crossref]
Yu N, Li W, Kang Q, et al. Clinical features and
obstetric and neonatal outcomes of pregnant
patients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a
retrospective, single-centre, descriptive study.
Lancet Infect Dis 2020; 20: 559-64. [Crossref]
Yang H, Sun G, Tang F, et al. Clinical features and
outcomes of pregnant women suspected of
coronavirus disease 2019. J Infect 2020; S01634453(20)30212-7. [Crossref]
Liang H, Acharya G. Novel corona virus disease
(COVID-19) in pregnancy: What clinical recommendations to follow? Acta Obstet Gynecol
Scand 2020; 99: 439-42. [Crossref]
Ai T, Yang Z, Hou H, et al. Correlation of Chest
CT and RT-PCR Testing in Coronavirus Disease
2019 (COVID-19) in China: A Report of 1014
Cases. Radiology 2020; 200642. [Crossref]
Schwartz DA, Graham AL. Potential maternal
and infant outcomes from coronavirus 2019nCoV (SARS-CoV-2) infecting pregnant women:
lessons from SARS, MERS, and other human
coronavirus infections. Viruses 2020; 12: 194.
Al-Tawfiq JA. Middle east respiratory syndrome
coronavirus (MERS-CoV) and COVID-19 infection during pregnancy. Travel Med Infect Dis
Marim et al. COVID-19 in Pregnancy and Neonates
18. Diav-Citrin O, Blyakhman S, Shechtman S, et al.
Pregnancy outcome following in utero exposure
to hydroxychloroquine: a prospective comparative observational study. Reprod Toxicol 2013;
19. Cooper WO, Cheetham TC, Li DK, et al. Brief
report: Risk of adverse fetal outcomes associated with immunosuppressive medications for
chronic immune-mediated diseases in pregnancy.
Arthritis Rheum 2014; 66: 444-50. [Crossref]
20. Gayed M, Khamashta M, Culliford D, et al. Longterm outcomes of children born to mothers with
SLE exposed to hydroxychloroquine in pregnancy. Rheumatology 2014; 53: i55. [Crossref]
21. T.C. Salk Bakanl Halk Sal Genel Mdrl.
COVID-19 (Sars-CoV-2) enfeksiyonu rehberi.
22. Wang M, Cao R, Zhang L, et al. Remdesivir
and chloroquine effectively inhibit the recently
emerged novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in vitro. Cell Res 2020; 30: 269-71. [Crossref]
23. Delaney JW, Pinto R, Long J, et al. The influence
of corticosteroid treatment on the outcome of
influenza A(H1N1pdm09)-related critical illness.
Crit Care 2016; 20: 75. [Crossref]
24. Arabi YM, Mandourah Y, Al-Hameed F, et al.
Corticosteroid therapy for critically ill patients
with Middle East respiratory syndrome. Am
J Respir Crit Care Med 2018; 197: 757-67.
26. Thachil J, Tang N, Gando S, et al. ISTH interim
guidance on recognition and management of
coagulopathy in COVID-19. J Thromb Haemost
27. Coronavirus (COVID-19) infection in pregnancy,
Information for healthcare professionals. The
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. 2020.
28. Berghella V. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19):
29. Di Mascio D, Khalil A, Saccone G, et al. Outcome
of Coronavirus spectrum infections (SARS,
30. Della Gatta AN, Rizzo R, Pilu G, Simonazzi G.
31. Elshafeey F, Magdi R, Hindi N, et al. A systematic
32. Yan J, Guo J, Fan C, et al. Coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) in pregnant women: A report
based on 116 cases. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2020;
S0002-9378(20)30462-2. [Crossref]
33. Fakari FR, Simbar M. Coronavirus pandemic and
worries during pregnancy; a letter to editr. Arch
Acad Emerg Med 2020; 8: e21.
34. Liu D, Li L, Wu X, et al. Pregnancy and Perinatal
Outcomes of Women with COVID-19 Pneumonia: A Preliminary Analysis. Available From:
SSRN3548758. 2020. [Crossref]
35. Zhu H, Wang L, Fang C, et al. Clinical analysis of 10
neonates born to mothers with 2019-nCoV pneumonia. Transl Pediatr 2020; 9: 5160. [Crossref]
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2020; 55: 586-92.
38. Parazzini F, Bortolus R, Mauri PA, et al. Delivery
in pregnant women infected with SARS-CoV-2:
39. Lu Q, Shi Y. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
and neonate: what neonatologist need to know.
40. Morand A, Fabre A, Minodier P, et al. COVID-19
virus and children: What do we know? Arch Pediatr. 2020 Apr; 27: 117-8. [Crossref]
41. Mimouni F, Lakshminrusimha S3, Pearlman SA, et
al. Perinatal aspects on the covid-19 pandemic: a
practical resource for perinatal-neonatal specialists. J Perinatol 2020; 40: 820-6. [Crossref]
42. Dashraath P, Jing Lin Jeslyn W, Mei Xian Karen
L, et al. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
Pandemic and Pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
43. Qi H, Luo X, Zheng Y, et al. Safe Delivery for
COVID-19 Infected Pregnancies. BJOG 2020.
44. Zaigham M, Andersson O. Maternal and Perinatal
of 108 pregnancies. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
45. Li N, Han L, Peng M, et al. Maternal and neonatal
outcomes of pregnant women with COVID-19
pneumonia: a case-control study. Clin Infect Dis
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2020; 55: 586-92.
47. Zhang L, Jiang Y, Wei M, et al. Analysis of the
pregnancy outcomes in pregnant women with
COVID-19 in Hubei Province. Zhonghua Fu
Chan Ke Za Zhi 2020; 55: 166-71.
48. Chen D, Yang H, Cao Y, et al. Expert consensus
for managing pregnant women and neonates
born to mothers with suspected or confirmed
novel coronavirus (COVID-19) infection. Int J
Gynaecol Obstet 2020; 149: 130-6. [Crossref]
49. Parazzini F, Bortolus R, Mauri PA, Favilli A, Gerli S,
Ferrazzi E. Delivery in pregnant women infected
210  Marim et al. COVID-19 in Pregnancy and Neonates
50. Poon LC, Yang H, Kapur A, et al. Global interim
guidance on coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) during pregnancy and puerperium from
FIGO and allied partners: Information for healthcare professionals. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2020;
51. Edelson DP, Sasson C, Chan PS, et al. Interim
guidance for basic and advanced life support in
adults, children, and neonates with suspected
or confirmed COVID-19: From the Emergency
Cardiovascular Care Committee and Get with
CIRCULATIONAHA. [Crossref]
52. Favre G, Pomar L, Musso D, Baud D. 2019-nCoV
epidemic: what about pregnancies? Lancet 2020;
395: e40. [Crossref]
53. Schwartz DA, Graham AL. Potential Maternal
and Infant Outcomes from (Wuhan) Coronavirus 2019-nCoV Infecting Pregnant Women:
Lessons from SARS, MERS, and Other Human
Coronavirus Infections. Viruses 2020; 12; 194.
54. Robertson CA, Lowther SA, Birch T, et al. SARS
and pregnancy: a case report. Emerg Infect Dis
55. Wong SF, Chow KM, de Swiet M. Severe acute
respiratory syndrome and pregnancy. BJOG
56. Assiri A, Abedi GR, Al Masri M, Bin Saeed A,
Gerber SI, Watson JT. Middle east respiratory
syndrome coronavirus infection during pregnancy: a report of 5 cases from Saudi Arabia. Clin
Infect Dis 2016; 63: 951-3. [Crossref]
57. Shek CC, Ng PC, Fung GP, et al. Infants born
to mothers with severe acute respiratory syndrome. Pediatrics 2003; 112: e254. [Crossref]
58. Wong SF, Chow KM, Leung TN, et al. Pregnancy
and perinatal outcomes of women with severe
acute respiratory syndrome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2004; 191: 292-7. [Crossref]
59. van Well GTJ, Daalderop LA, Wolfs T, Kramer
BW. Human perinatal immunity in physiological
conditions and during infection. Mol Cell Pediatr
60. Cheng MP, Papenburg J, Desjardins M, et al. Diagnostic testing for Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome-Related Coronavirus-2: A Narrative
61. Chen Y, Peng H, Wang L, et al. Infants born to
mothers with a new Coronavirus (COVID-19).
Front Pediatr 2020; 8: 104. [Crossref]
62. Zeng H, Xu C, Fan J, et al. Antibodies in infants
born to mothers with COVID-19 Pneumonia.
JAMA 2020; 323: 1848-9. [Crossref]
63. Dong L, Tian J, He S, et al. Possible vertical transmission of SARS-CoV-2 from an nfected mother to her newborn. JAMA 2020; 323: 1846-8.
64. Kimberlin DW, Stagno S. Can SARS-CoV-2 Infection Be Acquired In Utero? More Definitive
jama.2020.4868. [Crossref]
65. Centers for Disease Control and Presention. Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Conrmed
control-recommendations.html#take_precautions. Accessed April 14, 2020.
Shah PS, Diambomba Y, Acharya G, et al. Classification system and case definition for SARSCoV-2 infection in pregnant women, fetuses, and
neonates. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 2020; 99:
Queensland Clinical Guideline Supplement:
Maternity care for mothers and babies during COVID-19 pandemic. Available From: URL:
pdf_file/0033/947148/g-covid-19.pdf Accessed
at April 14, 2020.
Puopolo KM, Hudak ML, Kimberlin DW, et al.
Intal Gudance: Management of Infants Born
to Mothers with COVID-19. Available From:
Guidance.pdf Accessed April 14, 2020.
Chandrasekharan P, Vento M, Trevisanuto D, et
al. Neonatal resuscitation and postresuscitation
care of nfants born to mothers with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 Infection. Am J
Bhimraj A, Morgan RL, Shumaker AH, et al. Infectious Diseases Society of America guidelines
on the treatment and management of patients
with COVID-19. Clin Infect Dis 2020; ciaa478.
Edward MS. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): Considerations in children. Uptodate.
com/contents/coronavirus-disease-2019-covid19-considerations-in children?search=covid%20
rank=2 Accessed at April 17, 2020.
Barnes BJ, Adrover JM, Baxter-Stoltzfus A, et al.
Targeting potential drivers of COVID-19: Neutrophil extracellular traps. J Exp Med 2020; 217:
e20200652. [Crossref]
Centers for Disease Control and Presention.
Davanzo R, Moro G, Sandri F, et al. Breastfeeding and Coronavirus Disease-2019. Ad interim
indications of the Italian Society of Neonatalogy
endorsed by the Union of European Neonatal
& Perinatal Societies. Matern Child Nut 2020;
e13010. [Crossref]
Lyons KE, Ryan CA, Dempsey EM, Ross RP,
Stanton C. Breast Milk, a source of beneficial microbes and associated benefits for nfant health.
Nutrients 2020; 12; 1039. [Crossref]
Michaelsen FK, Lauritzen L, Mortensen EL. Effects of breast-feeding on cognitive function. In
breast-feeding: Early influences on later health;
pp.199-215. [Crossref]
Eurasian J Med 2020; 52(2): 202-10
77. Marinelli KA, Lawrence RM. Safe Handling of
containers of expressed human milk in all settings
during the SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) Pandemic. J
Hum Lact 2020; 890334420919083. [Crossref]
78. Centers for Disease Control and Presention. Pregnancy and Breastfeeding. Available From: URL:
79. Remdesivir (United States: Investigational agent;
refer to Prescribing and Access Restrictions):
Drug information. In Uptodate. Available From:
r-to-prescribing-and-access-restrictions-drug information? search=remdesivi r&source=panel_
80. Hydroxychloroquine. Drugs and Lactation Database (LactMed) [Internet]. Available From:
83. Lopinavir and ritonavir: Drug information. In
86. Azithromycin (systemic): Drug information.
87. Prednisone: Drug information. In Uptodate.
89. Tocilizumab: Drug information. In Uptodate.
contents/tocilizumab-drug-information? search=
