ESPAO TEMTICO: COVID-19  CONTRIBUIES DA SADE COLETIVA
THEMATIC SECTION: COVID-19  PUBLIC HEALTH CONTRIBUTIONS
The role of primary care in the Brazilian
healthcare system: limits and possibilities
O papel da ateno primria na rede de ateno
 sade no Brasil: limites e possibilidades no
enfrentamento da COVID-19
Regina Paiva Daumas 1
Gulnar Azevedo e Silva 2
Renato Tasca 3
Iuri da Costa Leite 1
El papel de la atencin primaria en el sistema de
salud brasileo: lmites y posibilidades para
combatir COVID-19
Patrcia Brasil 4
Dirceu B. Greco 5
Victor Grabois 1
Gasto Wagner de Sousa Campos 6
Escola Nacional de Sade
Pblica Sergio Arouca,
Fundao Oswaldo Cruz,
Rio de Janeiro, Brasil.
2 Instituto de Medicina
Social, Universidade do
Estado do Rio de Janeiro,
Rio de Janeiro, Brasil.
3 Organizao Pan-Americana da Sade/
Organizao Mundial da
Sade, Braslia, Brasil.
4 Instituto Nacional de
Infectologia Evandro
Chagas, Fundao Oswaldo
Cruz, Rio de Janeiro,
5 Faculdade de Medicina,
Universidade Federal
de Minas Gerais, Belo
Horizonte, Brasil.
6 Faculdade de Cincias
Mdicas, Universidade
Estadual de Campinas,
Campinas, Brasil.
On March 12, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the disease caused by the novel
coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) a pandemic 1. The infection (COVID-19) is more transmissible and has a
higher case-fatality rate than influenza, estimated at some 14 times greater 2. The high infection rate,
with each case infecting 2 to 3 other individuals on average, leads to the epidemics expansion in geometric progression 3. In Brazil, where community transmission throughout the country was declared
on March 20, more than 147,000 cases and 10,000 deaths from COVID-19 had been confirmed as
of May 9, 2020 4. Isolation of cases and contacts and social distancing of the general population have
been the main strategies recommended to delay the expansion of COVID-19 and allow the health
systems adjustment to the rapidly increasing demand for hospital beds, especially in intensive care,
avoiding the collapse of hospital care 5,6.
The initial clinical presentation of COVID-19 is flu-like, with fever, cough, sore throat, and coryza. About 80% of patients recover without complications and are classified as mild or moderate cases
(either without pneumonia or with mild viral pneumonia) 7. The other 20% evolve with dyspnea and
hypoxemia secondary to extensive viral pneumonia and require hospitalization for oxygen therapy
and other interventions 8. One fourth of these (some 5% of the total) evolve to critical conditions due
to respiratory failure, disseminated intravascular coagulation, circulatory shock, or multiple organ
dysfunction, requiring intensive care. Case-fatality in the latter group is more than 40% 9,10.
COVID-19 treatment aims to meet the patients needs in different phases of the infection and
throughout the spectrum of severity, in a line of care that ranges from monitoring mild cases in isolation at home, with instructions on management of symptoms and the identification of early warning
signs, to admission in intensive care units (ICUs) and post-discharge rehabilitation. Mitigation of
risks of infection to health professionals and other patients should guide the choice of the best strategies for organizing the health care system to meet these needs 11.
To reduce transmission and limit mortality from COVID-19, government should create the conditions for individuals and families to maintain social distancing while preparing the health system to
deal with the pandemic. In Brazil, the Unified National Health System (SUS) should prepare to provide care for the growing number of COVID-19 patients, maintain care for other acute and chronic
illnesses, and ensure the safety of health professionals and patients during care 12.
any medium, without restrictions, as long as the original work is correctly
I. C. Leite
Escola Nacional de Sade
Pblica Sergio Arouca,
Fundao Oswaldo Cruz.
Rua Leopoldo Bulhes 1480,
Rio de Janeiro, RJ 21041-210,
Cad. Sade Pblica 2020; 36(6):e00104120
Daumas RP et al.
Recommendations for preparing the health system for COVID-19 care
The health systems capacity to fully perform its roles in the context of the pandemic requires not only
expanding the number of hospital and ICU beds, but also reorganizing the pathways along the health
system, redefining the roles of different units and levels of care and new points of entry, especially
remotely 11. All modalities of telehealth remote communications (remote health counseling, consulting, monitoring and bed management) play a central role from this moment on 13,14. A plan with protocols for all levels of care is crucial to link all these activities, including standards for health workers
protection and precautionary measures to avoid the spread of SARS-CoV-2 in healthcare units 15.
The WHO suggests creating 24-hour healthcare call centers, training attendants in the use of
protocols that allow distinguishing between mild, moderate, and severe cases, as well as advising
mild cases on home isolation measures. Serious cases should be transported to reference hospitals
for COVID-19 in ambulances reserved exclusively for this purpose, with qualified and adequately
protected personnel, according to the recommended infection prevention measures 11.
When preparing the health system for COVID-19 care, we also need health facilities with low and
medium-complexity beds in COVID-19 wards to hospitalize suspected cases at high risk for severe
disease or those who cannot stay at home in self-isolation, such as those with comorbidities, those
who live alone and those who are most affected by the disease, although not seriously ill. These services should be adequately equipped to conduct therapeutic interventions, monitor signs of clinical
deterioration, and provide timely transfer to higher complexity beds when necessary. These units
should also admit patients that are discharged from reference hospitals but who still require hospital
care, thus helping free up high-complexity beds for critical patients 11,16.
The description of COVID-19 care demands emphasizes that the direct role of primary healthcare
(PHC) in moderate and severe cases is quite limited. Face-to-face care for suspected cases of COVID-19
in PHC units should be avoided whenever possible (besides having little impact on the outcome of
the disease), since it involves high risk of infection both to the healthcare team and to other patients.
The role of PHC during the COVID-19 pandemic
Although PHC has limited capacity to act on the case-fatality of serious cases, a strong and wellorganized PHC system with qualified personnel in adequate numbers can help decrease the infections incidence in the population in its covered area, with a direct impact on drecreasing morbidity
and mortality. Through community work, PHC can act to reduce the infections spread, monitor
mild cases in home isolation, support communities during social distancing, identify and deal with
situations of individual or collective vulnerability, and especially guarantee access to healthcare and
the necessary referrals during the epidemics most critical phases. PHC can thus play a central role in
mitigating the pandemics effects, maintaining and extending its attributes such as access to the firstcontact access, long-term person-fosused care, comprehensive care, and coordination of care, and
especially cultural competence and family and community orientation 17.
By reaffirming its calling for community action, PHC can expand the local response capacity not
only to reduce the infections spread, but also to attenuate the social and economic effects of social
distancing measures. For example, through social medias and community radios, family health teams
can advise the population on the modes of transmission and inform people about health care call
centers. The work by community health agents can help identify the most vulnerable individuals and
families, in situations of greater vulnerability, assist the distribution of food and other essential items,
and mobilize resources within the community itself.
In individual clinical care, using telehealth modalities, PHC professionals can adivide suspected
cases on self-isolation and identification of warning signs; identify patients who cannot be cared for
at home; monitor the clinical evolution of these suspected cases; conduct teleconsultations for more
complex cases; and request referral to a hospital when signs of clinical deterioration are identified.
All these measures help reduce demand and the risks of infection in emergency units and allow concentrating the latters resources on treatment of more serious cases.
Cad. Sade Pblica 2020; 36(6):e00104120
THE ROLE OF PRIMARY CARE FOR FIGHTING COVID-19
In order to maintain access to healthcare for other conditions, the work by PHC during the pandemic should also focus on: (1) continuity of preventive activities such as vaccination; (2) follow-up of
chronic patients and priority groups like pregnant women and infants; and (3) care for minor emergencies and acute exacerbations of chronic illnesses. The suspension of these activities for several
weeks could result in increased morbidity and mortality from other causes, expanding the pandemics
effects, as reported in situation in which the choice was made for a clinical care model centered only
on hospital care 18.
continuous-use medications or even clinical evaluation, which can often be performed by teleconsultation. Face-to-face care at the PHC unit would be reserved for patients with acute non-respiratory
complaints and for those with acute complications of chronic diseases, in which the approach can be
via PHC, with up to a few hours of treatment and clinical observation, avoiding the patients visit to
hospital and emergency services, which will tend to be increasingly overloaded during the pandemic.
The availability of personal protective equipment and updates on infection prevention and control
measures according to the best available evidence, with periodic training, supports the safe maintenance of healthcare activities at the PHC unit and at home.
In addition to telecare, home visits by physicians and nurses can ensure maintenance of care for
patients with more complex conditions and higher risk, including those who need to change bandages
and dressings. Home visits by community health agents, conducted in the peridomicile, obeying social
distancing, allow follow-up of patients who do not have telephones and the delivery of medications
and basic inputs to the population, thus avoiding patients unnecessary visits to the PHC unit.
Even with all the effort to expand teleconsultations, and although call centers to handle suspected
cases of COVID-19 are prioritized, a substantial portion of the population in the territory will continue to visit PHC services and hospital emergency departments. Patients should thus be screened
at the first point of contact with any health service, and all precautions should be taken to control
infection, according to the prevailing guidelines, which include care in open-air areas, limitation of
physical contact, modifications to patient flows, separation of examination areas and waiting areas,
distancing, physical barriers, and availability and rational use of personal protective equipament
(PPE), according to the activity and type of contact performed 1. As the epidemic progresses, the risk
of infection in health units increases, even with patients not reporting respiratory symptoms, since
cases of asymptomatic infection and atypical presentations become more numerous. This justifies
expanding the use of PPE and infection control measures to diverse situations and areas of care 19.
The risks of COVID-19 transmission in health services and the high costs of implementing biosafety standards justify the widespread use of telecare tools and all the necessary financial support
to implement them. Based on the strategies, it becomes possible for the restriction and regulation of
physical access to PHC services not to represent total restriction of access, but to be replaced by safer
and more cost-effective forms of care. To implement the necessary changes for full functioning of
PHC during the pandemic, investments in structures such as tents for external care, vehicles to support home care, and cellphones and internet will be indispensable, as well as free access to internet
for all users.
The creation of dedicated COVID-19 hubs for handling suspected cases, conducting initial management, and facilitating referrals when necessary is a valid alternative where it is not feasible to
adjust the PHC unit to conduct these activities safely 11. However, it is impossible to function properly without the effective exchange of information between these hubs and PHC units, essential for
the latter to maintain surveillance and coordination of care in their respective coverage areas. Only
strong PHC connected to the other points of care, with greater community action and capacity for
coordination, will be capable of minimizing the pandemics harms and avoiding the breakdown of
care for chronic and acute conditions.
Cad. Sade Pblica 2020; 36(6):e00104120
Daumas RP et al.
Limits to action by PHC given the deficiencies in the network of care for COVID-19
The full exercise of activities inherent to PHC that might otherwise reduce the pandemics magnitude
and impact in populations is diminished, especially by the shortage of hospital beds and the lack of
definition of patient flows, problems that already existed before COVID-19.
For example, in the city of Rio de Janeiro, where the Mobile Emergency Medical Service (SAMU)
does not conduct home care for urgent COVID-19 cases and the PHC units (USBs in Portuguese) are
responsible for receiving patients with respiratory symptoms and requesting vacancies for hospital
admission, COVID-19 cases, especially the more severe ones, accumulate in these units while waiting for hospital beds. A similar process occurs in the Emergency Care Units (UPAs in Portuguese),
another portal of entry for COVID-19 beds and which are experiencing growing difficulty in referring their patients to specialized beds 20.
In the same city of Rio de Janeiro, the lack of basic and intermediate beds for COVID-19 cases
has meant that many patients referred to the emergency-care UPAs are returned to the PHC units,
invariably in worse condition than before. The impossibility of hospitalizing patients without signs
of respiratory failure but with high risk of clinical deterioration or with contraindication to home
isolation 21 has delayed the implementation of adequate clinical support and raised major apprehension among health teams, who are acutely aware of the risk of patients arriving at the PHC unit in
respiratory failure or of dying at home without medical care.
The shortage of designated COVID-19 beds, alongside the flow of access to these beds via PHC
and emergency units, as in the city of Rio de Janeiro, tends to seriously jeopardize the capacity of these
health services to provide healthcare for patients with other diseases, while also increasing the risks
of COVID-19 transmission. Transportation of severe patients from home directly to the reference
hospital for COVID-19 treatment, as suggested by the WHO 11, should be considered a top priority,
since it speeds up arrival to the site where the definitive therapy can be performed and reduces the
points of the patients contact with other health units and transportation teams, highly vulnerable to
SARS-CoV-2 infection.
available resources, telehealth resources need to be connected to prehospital care (SAMU-COVID)
and regulation of beds by the SUS. Protocols for triage and classification of cases as mild, moderate,
and severe, with and without risk of complications, need to be implemented to support decisions on
emergency telehealth and PHC. Complete and consistent communications among all components of
the health system and with the population must be created urgently to guarantee their effectiveness
and transparency 13.
inefficient use of resources. The health systems capacity to save lives in this pandemic will depend
not only on the number of ICU beds and ventilators, but also on the organization of the network of
care to guarantee timely access to these beds, maintenance of care pathways for other diseases, and
treatment of various types of urgent and emergency conditions. The specific solutions for this organization should be adapted to each context, respecting the general premises and local response capacity,
with the understanding that Brazil is a continental-sized and heterogeneous country. In Brazils large
cities, where the disease has spread more quickly, much can be done with the existing infrastructures,
complemented by new resources and initiatives.
The results of these efforts at reorganization will be limited if the deficiencies in the health care
system are not resolved. These networks are weak and fragmented with persistently insufficient
PHC in many places of Brazil to deal with an emergency like the current pandemic, which depends
on effective services projected to the community. Despite the expansion of PHC in Brazil in recent
years, the lack of mechanisms to guarantee its sustainability continues to threaten the continuity
Cad. Sade Pblica 2020; 36(6):e00104120
THE ROLE OF PRIMARY CARE FOR FIGHTING COVID-19
of care throughout the country 22. The lack of coordination between levels of care and of systemic
flows in the healthcare system, as identified previously 23, has become even more critical in the
pandemic, revealing the importance of adopting strategies that allow effective coordination of care
with PHC teams.
The COVID-19 epidemic reached Brazil after Congress had unwisely imposed a cap on expenditures in health and education by passing Constitutional Amendment n. 95 24, which freezes or drastically
curtails budget funds for health. At the same time, important structural policies for PHC came under
serious assault. These featured the Brazils More Doctors Program, created to address the shortage of
physicians in PHC and whose discontinuity exacerbated healthcare voids in highly vulnerable localities. Next, the new model for financing primary care 25 imposed by the current Federal administration
places the systems universal coverage in serious jeopardy 22. Although new resources can be allocated
for the SUS during the pandemic, it is impossible to ignore the negative impact of the chronic underfinancing of the SUS on the populations health, since the majority of the Brazilian population depend
on this public system.
system to deal with the crisis makes this an especially appropriate moment for reinforcing and adequately financing the SUS. In addition, the extremely serious current health emergency highlights
the privileged position of primary care for guaranteeing access to healthcare and for acting on health
determinants in the face of an emerging challenge. The prioritization of PHC, with the expansion
of the Family Health Strategy and strengthening of all its attributes, emphasizing so-called derived
attributes (cultural competence and family and community orientation) 17 are essential measures for
containing the spread of COVID-19 in the population.
Azevedo e Silva, R. Tasca, I. C. Leite, P. Brasil, D. B.
Greco, V. Grabois, and G. W. S. Campos contributed
break-a-pandemic (accessed on 18/Apr/2020).
2. Verity R, Okell LC, Dorigatti I, Winskill P,
Whittaker C, Imai N, et al. Estimates of the
severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a model-based analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 2020;
3. Li Q, Guan X, Wu P, Wang X, Zhou L, Tong Y,
et al. Early transmission dynamics in Wuhan,
China, of novel coronavirus-infected pneumonia. N Engl J Med 2020; 382:1199-207.
4. Dong E, Du H, Gardner L. An interactive webbased dashboard to track COVID-19 in real
time. Lancet Infect Dis 2020; 20:533-4.
stract=3561244 (accessed on 24/Apr/2020).
6. Prem K, Liu Y, Russell TW, Kucharski AJ, Eggo RM, Davies N, et al. The effect of control
strategies to reduce social mixing on outcomes
of the COVID-19 epidemic in Wuhan, China:
a modelling study. Lancet Public Health 2020;
7. Wu Z, McGoogan JM. Characteristics of and
important lessons from the coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) outbreak in China: summary
of a report of 72314 cases from the Chinese
Center for Disease Control and Prevention.
Additional informations
da Costa Leite (0000-0002-9136-8948); Patrcia
Brasil (0000-0001-9555-7976); Dirceu B. Greco
(0000-0002-4419-5634); Victor Grabois (00000003-3310-4212); Gasto Wagner de Sousa Campos (0000-0001-5195-0215).
Cad. Sade Pblica 2020; 36(6):e00104120
Daumas RP et al.
8. Negri EM, Piloto B, Morinaga LK, Jardim CVP,
Lamy SAE-D, Ferreira MA, et al. Heparin therapy improving hypoxia in COVID-19 patients
9. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Interim clinical guidance for management of patients with confirmed coronavirus
ance-management-patients.html (accessed on
10. World Health Organization. Clinical care for
severe acute respiratory infection: toolkit:
COVID-19 adaptation. Geneva: World Health
11. World Health Organization. Operational considerations for case management of COVID-19
siderations-for-case-management-of-covid19-in-health-facility-and-community-interimguidance,-19-march-2020 (accessed on 11/
12. Cho SY, Kang J-M, Ha YE, Park GE, Lee JY,
Ko J-H, et al. MERS-CoV outbreak following a
single patient exposure in an emergency room
in South Korea: an epidemiological outbreak
study. Lancet 2016; 388:994-1001.
13. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Outpatient and ambulatory care settings:
responding to community transmission of
ambulatory-care-settings.html (accessed on
14. Greenhalgh T, Koh GCH, Car J. Covid-19: avaliao remota em Ateno Primria  Sade.
15. Associao Brasileira de Sade Coletiva. Entidades enviam carta ao ministro sobre o risco de
disseminao da Covid-19 nas unidades bsicas
covid_19/46432/ (accessed on 28/Apr/2020).
16. Organizacin Panamericana de la Salud. Recomendaciones para la reorganizacin y ampliacin progresiva de los servicios de salud para la
va-servicios-salud-para-respuesta (accessed on
17. Starfield B. Ateno primria: equilbrio entre
necessidades de sade, servios e tecnologia.
18. Nacoti M, Ciocca A, Giupponi A, Brambillasca
P, Lussana F, Pisano M, et al. At the epicenter of
19. Public Health England. COVID-19 personal
trol/covid-19-personal-protective-equipmentppe (acessado em 19/Abr/2020).
20. Altino L. Com UPAs lotadas, pacientes com
falta de oxignio aguardam horas e enfrentam
21. Prefeitura Municipal do Rio de Janeiro. Resoluo SMS no 4345 de 30 de maro de 2020. Aprova e concede efeito normativo  Nota Tcnica
Conjunta SUBREG e SUBHUE - COVID -19
de 27 de maro de 2020. Dirio Oficial do Municpio do Rio de Janeiro 2020; 31 mar.
22. Giovanella L, Franco CM, Almeida PF. Poltica
Nacional de Ateno Bsica: para onde vamos?
Cinc Sade Colet 2020; 25:1475-82.
23. Viana ALdA, Bousquat A, Melo GA, Negri Filho AD, Medina MG. Regionalizao e Redes de
Sade. Cinc Sade Colet 2018; 23:1791-8.
24. Brasil. Emenda Constitucional no 95, de 15 de
dezembro de 2016. Altera o Ato das Disposies Constitucionais Transitrias, para instituir
o Novo Regime Fiscal, e d outras providncias.
Dirio Oficial da Unio 2016; 15 dez.
25. Ministrio da Sade. Portaria no 2.979, de 12 de
novembro de 2019. Institui o Programa Previne
Brasil, que estabelece novo modelo de financiamento de custeio da Ateno Primria  Sade no mbito do Sistema nico de Sade, por
meio da alterao da Portaria de Consolidao
no 6/GM/MS, de 28 de setembro de 2017. Dirio Oficial da Unio 2019; 13 nov.
Submitted on 30/Apr/2020
Final version resubmitted on 11/May/2020
Approved on 15/May/2020
Cad. Sade Pblica 2020; 36(6):e00104120
