The COVID-19 Cytokine Storm; What
We Know So Far
Dina Ragab 1*, Haitham Salah Eldin 2 , Mohamed Taeimah 3 , Rasha Khattab 4 and
Ramy Salem 1
Edited by:
Laura Maggi,
Remo Castro Russo,
Gerais, Brazil
Paul Proost,
KU Leuven, Belgium
Dina Ragab
Specialty section:
Cytokines and Soluble Mediators in
Frontiers in Immunology
Ragab D, Salah Eldin H, Taeimah M,
Khattab R and Salem R (2020) The
COVID-19 Cytokine Storm; What We
Know So Far.
Front. Immunol. 11:1446.
COVID-19 is a rapidly spreading global threat that has been declared as a pandemic
by the WHO. COVID-19 is transmitted via droplets or direct contact and infects the
respiratory tract resulting in pneumonia in most of the cases and acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS) in about 15 % of the cases. Mortality in COVID-19 patients
has been linked to the presence of the so-called cytokine storm induced by the
virus. Excessive production of proinflammatory cytokines leads to ARDS aggravation
and widespread tissue damage resulting in multi-organ failure and death. Targeting
cytokines during the management of COVID-19 patients could improve survival rates
and reduce mortality.
Keywords: COVID-19, cytokine, storm, ARDS, IL-6
In December 2019, an outbreak of pneumonia cases was reported in Wuhan, China. The outbreak
was linked to the Huanan food Market. The new virus, 2019-nCoV, so called then, was isolated
on 7 January 2020 and identified as the cause of the outbreak (1). The 2019-nCoV virus rapidly
spread across China and many other countries and caused a rapidly growing global outbreak. On
11 February 2020, the WHO has named the disease COVID-19, short for coronavirus disease
2019 (2) and on 12 March 2020 the total number of COVID-19 confirmed cases reached 125,260
globally with 80,981 cases in China and 44,279 outside of China and the COVID-19 was declared
to be a pandemic by the WHO (3). As of 26 May 2020, COVID-19 has been confirmed in 5,404,512
individuals globally with deaths reaching 343,514 with a morality of 6.4%, The United States had
the highest number of confirmed cases (1,618,757 cases) (4).
TRANSMISSION AND CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS OF COVID-19
COVID-19 is caused by the SARS-CoV-2 that belongs to the beta-coronaviruses subfamily.
Coronaviruses are enveloped, positive single stranded large RNA viruses. Although the first data
available about COVID-19 indicates possible animal-to-human transmission via wild animals
in Huanan seafood Market in Wuhan (5, 6), epidemiological data and studies, after that, have
Ragab et al.
The COVID-19 Cytokine Storm
or liver enzyme levels (ALT and AST) occurs in complicated cases
progressing to multi-organ failure (18).
increasingly demonstrated that the virus transmits human-tohuman, through droplets or direct contact, with the reporting
that individuals who did not have direct contact with the
Huanan seafood market were diagnosed with COVID-19 and
with secondary cases occurring at hospitals among health care
workers who had extensive contact with COVID-19 patients.
The virus was confirmed to spread through respiratory droplets
from coughs or sneezes (79) with the ability of the host
to shed the infection while asymptomatic (10). Studies are
now also proposing the possible feco-oral transmission of the
COVID-19 patients are mainly adults older than 18 years
old with a male predominance, the preconceived notion that
pediatrics are not subjected to infection later changed with
confirmed cases occurring in pediatrics in China and worldwide
(12, 13), however, mortality is still much more in the adult group
above the age of 65 years. Adults with pre-existing cardiovascular
diseases, respiratory diseases, endocrine diseases, diabetics, or
immunocompromised adults remain the most exposed to serious
complication of COVID-19 (14).
Although many patients of COVID-19 remain asymptomatic,
some patients get pneumonia and 10% of cases require
mechanical ventilation and ICU admission. Patients usually
present with fever, dry cough, shortness of breath, headache,
malaise, muscle, and bony aches. Less common symptoms
include sore throat, confusion, productive cough, hemoptysis,
diarrhea, nausea, and chest pain (15). Progression to pneumonia
is documented by radiological findings and usually occurs 12
weeks after the beginning of the symptoms. Signs of pneumonia
include decreased oxygen saturation, deterioration of blood
gas, multi-focal glass ground opacities, or patchy/segmental
consolidation in chest X-ray or CT. Patients presenting
late or deteriorating hospitalized patients usually suffer
from acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), acute
respiratory failure, acute renal injury, and multi-organ
CYTOKINE PROFILE AND THE CYTOKINE
The newly emerging COVID-19 is continuing to challenge
medical health systems all over the world and the scenario is
still getting worse. The COVID-19 poses an increasing threat
to humans with a fatality rate of 6.4 % so far (4). COVID-19
infection is accompanied by an aggressive inflammatory response
with the release of a large amount of pro-inflammatory cytokines
in an event known as cytokine storm. The host immune
response to the SARS-CoV-2 virus is hyperactive resulting in
an excessive inflammatory reaction. Several studies analyzing
cytokine profiles from COVID-19 patients suggested that the
cytokine storm correlated directly with lung injury, multiorgan failure, and unfavorable prognosis of severe COVID-19
The immune system has an exquisite mechanism capable
of responding to various pathogens. Normal anti-viral immune
response requires the activation of the inflammatory pathways of
the immune system; however, aberrant or exaggerated response
of the hosts immune system can cause severe disease if
remains uncontrolled (25). Cytokines are an essential part of
the inflammatory process. Cytokines are produced by several
immune cells including the innate macrophages, dendritic cells,
natural killer cells and the adaptive T and B lymphocytes.
During an innate immune response to a viral infection, pattern
recognition receptors (PRRs) recognize different molecular
structures that are characteristic to the invading virus. These
molecular structures are referred to as pathogen associated
molecular patterns (PAMPs). Binding of PAMPs to PRRs triggers
the start of the inflammatory response against the invading virus
resulting in the activation of several signaling pathways and
subsequently transcription factors which induce the expression
of genes responsible for production of several products involved
in the hosts immune response to the virus, among which are the
genes encoding several pro-inflammatory cytokines. The major
transcription factors that are activated by PRRs are nuclear factor
kB, activation protein 1, interferon response factors three and
seven. These transcription factors induce the expression of genes
encoding inflammatory cytokines, chemokines and adhesion
molecules. This sequence of events results in recruitment of
leukocytes and plasma proteins to site of infection where they
perform various effector functions that serve to combat the
triggering infection (26).
Three of the most important pro-inflammatory cytokines of
the innate immune response are IL-1, TNF- , and IL-6. Tissue
macrophages, mast cells, endothelial, and epithelial cells are the
major source of these cytokines during innate immune response.
The cytokine storm results from a sudden acute increase
in circulating levels of different pro-inflammatory cytokines
including IL-6, IL-1, TNF- , and interferon. This increase
in cytokines results in influx of various immune cells such
as macrophages, neutrophils, and T cells from the circulation
LABORATORY FINDINGS OF COVID-19
Complete blood picture of COVID-19 patients usually shows
lymphopenia with or without total leukopenia. A lymphocyte
count <1.0  109 /L has been associated with severe disease (18).
A recent research has reported that severe cases of COVID19 tend to have higher neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio (NLR).
NLR is calculated from a routine blood picture by dividing
the absolute neutrophil count by the absolute lymphocyte
count and indicates a patients overall inflammatory status.
Increasing NLR is a risk factor of mortality not only in infectious
diseases but also in malignancy, acute coronary syndrome,
intracerebral hemorrhage, polymyositis, and dermatomyostis
(19). Platelet count is usually normal or mildly decreased. Creaction protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate are usually
increased while procalcitonin levels are normal and elevation
of procalcitonin usually indicates secondary bacterial infection.
Lactate dehydrogenase, ferritin, D-dimer, and creatine kinase
elevation is associated with severe disease. Elevation in creatinine
Ragab et al.
The COVID-19 Cytokine Storm
the two coronaviruses highly related to COVID-19; SARS-CoV
and MERS-CoV (31, 32). Both pro-inflammatory cytokines
(e.g., IL-1, IL-6, and TNF-) and anti-inflammatory cytokines
(e.g., IL-10 and IL-1 receptor antagonist) are elevated in the
serum of CS patients. The main contributors to the interplay
of the cytokine storm are IL-6 and TNF-. In the absence of
an immediate and appropriate therapeutic intervention, patients
develop ARDS as a result of acute lung damage followed by
multi-organ failure and resulting in death. Hence, the CS should
be treated immediately, otherwise mortality can result (28). In
addition to anti-viral therapies that can directly target the virus,
anti-inflammatory therapies that diminish the cytokine responses
are suggested to decrease both the morbidity and mortality in
COVID-19 patients.
The early recognition of CS and the prompt treatment can lead
to better outcome. Several biological agents targeting cytokines
have been proposed for treating CS. IL-1 receptor antagonist,
anakinra, which is used in treatment of rheumatoid arthritis,
was proven to be helpful in cytophagic histiocytic panniculitis
with secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, a disease
associated with severe CS (33). Tocilizumab is a recombinant
humanized IL-6 receptor antagonist that interferes with IL-6
binding to its receptor and blocks signaling. Tocilizumab is used
in treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis,
giant cell arteritis, and has proven valuable in treatment of CS
triggered by CAR-T cell therapy for hematological malignancies
(34). Downstream inhibitors of cytokines, e.g., JAK inhibitors, are
also being explored in treating CS.
As IL-6 is the most frequently reported cytokine to be
increased in COVID-19 patients and as IL-6 elevated levels
have been associated to higher mortalities, tocilizumab is
a candidate drug to be used in managing the cytokine
storm accompanying COVID-19. Encouraging results have
been reported in China where tocilizumab was used in
treatment of 21 patients with severe and critical COVID19. Clinical data showed that the symptoms, hypoxygenmia,
and CT opacity changes were improved immediately after the
treatment with tocilizumab in most of the patients, suggesting
that tocilizumab could be an efficient therapeutic agent for
treatment of the cytokine storm associated with COVID-19 (35).
The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved
Roches Phase III clinical trial of the use of tocilizumab in
hospitalized patients with severe COVID-19 pneumonia. The
trial is planned to include 330 patients with severe COVID-19
Cytokine storm appears to be one of the common causes
of mortality in the recently declared pandemic of COVID19. Therapeutic approaches to manage the COVID-19 cytokine
storm might provide an avenue to decrease the COVID19 associated morbidity and mortality and is the focus of
upcoming studies.
into the site of infection with destructive effects on human
tissue resulting from destabilization of endothelial cell to cell
interactions, damage of vascular barrier, capillary damage, diffuse
alveolar damage, multiorgan failure, and ultimately death. Lung
injury is one consequence of the cytokine storm that can progress
into acute lung injury or its more severe form ARDS (27).
ARDS leading to low oxygen saturation levels is a major cause of
mortality in COVID-19. Although the exact mechanism of ARDS
in COVID-19 patients is not fully understood, the excessive
production of pro-inflammatory cytokines is considered to be
one of the major contributing factors (1517).
Accumulating evidence suggests that some patients with
severe COVID-19 suffer from a cytokine storm. Analysis of
cytokine levels in plasma of 41 COVID-19 confirmed cases
in China revealed elevated levels of IL-1, IL-7, IL-8, IL-9,
IL-10, FGF, G-CSF, GM-CSF, IFN-, IP-10, MCP-1, MIP-1A,
MIP1-B, PDGF, TNF-, and VEGF in both patients admitted
to the ICU and non-ICU patients compared to healthy adults.
All patients included in the study had pneumonia and 1/3 of
the patients were admitted to ICU and six of these patients
A multicenter retrospective study of 150 COVID-19 patients
in China evaluated predictors of mortality for COVID-19. The
study analyzed data from 82 cases who resolved from COVID-19
and 68 cases who died from COVID-19 and reported significantly
higher levels of IL-6 in mortality cases than resolving cases (20).
Another study analyzing data from 21 patients in China reported
increased levels of IL-10, IL-6, and TNF- in severe cases (n =
11 patients) compared to moderate cases (n = 10 patients) (21).
A similar study by Gao et al. assessed 43 patients in China and
reported that levels of IL-6 were significantly higher in severe
cases (n = 15) than in mild cases (n = 28) (22). Similarly, Chen
et al. studied a total of 29 COVID-19 patients, divided into three
groups according to relevant diagnostic criteria, and found that
IL-6 was higher in critical cases (n = 5 patients) than in severe
cases (n = 9 patients) and that IL-6 was higher in severe cases
than in mild cases (n = 15 cases) (23).
No much data is available yet regarding severe pediatric
COVID-19 patients. A study that evaluated eight critically ill
Chinese pediatric COVID-19 patients treated in the ICU, with
ages ranging from 2 months to 15 years, reported increased
levels of IL-6, IL-10, and IFN- among other laboratory
Cytokine storm (CS) is a critical life-threating condition
requiring intensive care admission and having a quite high
mortality. CS is characterized by a clinical presentation
of overwhelming systemic inflammation, hyperferritinemia,
hemodynamic instability, and multi-organ failure, and if left
untreated, it leads to death. The trigger for CS is an uncontrolled
immune response resulting in continuous activation and
expansion of immune cells, lymphocytes, and macrophages,
which produce immense amounts of cytokines, resulting in a
cytokine storm. The CS clinical findings are attributed to the
action of the proinflammatory cytokines like IL-1, IL-6, IL-18,
IFN-, and TNF- (27).
CS has been reported in several viral infections including
influenza H5N1 virus (28, 29), influenza H1N1 virus (30), and
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Ragab et al.
The COVID-19 Cytokine Storm
1. WHO. Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) Situation Report 1. (2020). Available
2. WHO. Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) Situation Report 22. (2020). Available
3. WHO. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) Situation Report 52. (2020).
4. WHO. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) Situation Report 127. (2020).
5. Peng Z, Xing-Lou Y, Xian-Guang W, Ben H, Zhang L, Zhang W, et al. A
pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin.
6. Guo Y, Cao Q, Hong Z, Tan Y, Chen S-D, Jin H-J, et al. The
origin, transmission and clinical therapies on coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) outbreakan update on the status. Mil Med Res. (2020)
7. Zhao S, Zhuang Z, Ran J, Lin J, Yang G, Yang L, et al. The association between
domestic train transportation and novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) outbreak
in China from 2019 to 2020: a data-driven correlational report. Travel Med
8. Wang X, Pan Z, Cheng Z. Association between 2019-nCoV
transmission and N95 respirator use. J Hosp Infect. (2020)
9. Chan J, Yuan S, Kok K, To K, Chu H, Yang J, et al. A familial cluster of
pneumonia associated with the 2019 novel coronavirus indicating personto-person transmission: a study of a family cluster. Lancet. (2020) 395:514
10. Bai Y, Yao L, Wei T, Tian F, Jin D-Y, Chen L, et al. Presumed
asymptomatic carrier transmission of COVID-19. JAMA. (2020) 323:1406
11. Gu J, Han B, Wang J. COVID-19: gastrointestinal manifestations and
potential fecal-oral transmission. Gastroenterology. (2020) 158: 1518
12. Dong Y, Mo X, Hu Y, Qi X, Jiang F, Jiang Z, et al. Epidemiological
characteristics of 2,143 pediatric patients with 2019 coronavirus disease in
13. Le H, Nguyen L, Tran D, Do H, Tran HT, Le YT, et al. The first infant case of
COVID-19 acquired from a secondary transmission in Vietnam. Lancet Child
14. Zhou F, Yu T, Du R, Fan G, Liu Y, Liu Z, et al. Clinical course
and risk factors for mortality of adult inpatients with COVID-19 in
Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet. (2020) 395:1054
15. Chen N, Zhou M, Dong X, Qu J, Gong F, Han Y, et al. Epidemiological
and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel coronavirus
pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study. Lancet. (2020)
16. Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, Zhao J, Hu Y, et al. Clinical features of
patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet.
17. Lai C, Shih T, Ko W, Tang H, Hsueh P-R. Severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and coronavirus disease-2019
(COVID-19): the epidemic and the challenges. Int J Antimicrob Agents. (2020)
19. Liu Y, Du X, Chen J, Jin Y, Peng L, Wang HHX, et al.
Neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio as an independent risk factor for
maortality in hospitalized patients with COVID-19. J Infect. (2020)
Ruan Q, Yang K, Wang W, Jiang L, Song J. Clinical predictors of mortality
due to COVID-19 based on an analysis of data of 150 patients from Wuhan,
Chen G, Wu D, Guo W, Cao Y, Huang D, Wang H, et al. Clinical and
immunologic features in severe and moderate Coronavirus Disease 2019. J
Gao Y, Li T, Han M, Li X, Wu D, Xu Y, et al. Diagnostic utility of clinical
laboratory data determinations for patients with the severe COVID-19. J Med
Chen L, Liu H, Liu W, Liu J, Liu K, Shang J, et al. Analysis of clinical features
of 29 patients with 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia. Zhonghua Jie He He
Sun D, Li H, Lu X, Xiao H, Ren J, Zhang F-R, et al. Clinical
features of severe pediatric patients with coronavirus disease 2019 in
Wuhan: a single centers observational study. World J Pediatr. (2020)
Braciale T, Hahn Y. Immunity to viruses. Immunol Rev. (2013)
Thompson M, Kaminski J, Kurt-Jones E, Fitzgerald K. Pattern recognition
receptors and the innate immune response to viral infection. Viruses. (2011)
Shimizu M. Clinical features of cytokine storm syndrome. In: Cron R,
Ishikawa T. Clinical preparedness for cytokine storm induced by the highly
pathogenic H5N1 influenza virus. J Pharmacogenom Pharmacoproteomics.
Kalaiyarasu S, Kumar M, Senthil Kumar D, Bhatia S, Dash SK, Bhat S, et al.
Highly pathogenic avian in?uenza H5N1 virus induces cytokine dysregulation
with suppressed maturation of chicken monocyte-derived dendritic cells.
Woo P, Tung E, Chan K, Lau C, Lau SKP, Yuen K-Y. Cytokine profiles induced
by the novel swine-origin influenza A/H1N1 virus: implications for treatment
Lau S, Lau C, Chan K, Li C, Chen H, Jin D-Y, et al. Delayed
induction of proinflammatory cytokines and suppression of innate antiviral
response by the novel Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus:
implications for pathogenesis and treatment. J Gen Virol. (2013) 94:2679
Channappanavar R, Perlman S. Pathogenic human coronavirus infections:
causes and consequences of cytokine storm and immunopathology. Semin
Behrens E, Kreiger P, Cherian S, Cron R. Interleukin 1 receptor antagonist
to treat cytophagic histiocytic panniculitis with secondary hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis. J Rheumatol. (2006) 33:20814.
Chen H, Wang F, Zhang P, Zhang Y, Chen Y, Fan X, et al. Management of
cytokine release syndrome related to CAR-T cell therapy. Front Med. (2019)
Xu X, Han M, Li T, Sun W, Wang D, et al. Effective treatment of severe
COVID-19 patients with Tocilizumab. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 117:11970
potential conflict of interest.
Copyright  2020 Ragab, Salah Eldin, Taeimah, Khattab and Salem. This is an
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply
with these terms.
