Immune  Response, Inflammation, and the Clinical Spectrum of Luis
F. Garca* Grupo de Inmunologa Celular e  Inmunogentica,  Facultad
de  Medicina,  Sede de Investigacin Universitaria, Universidad de
Antioquia, Medelln, Colombia Edited by: Lucia Lopalco,  San  Raf‐
faele  Hospital  (IRCCS), Italy Morgane Bomsel, Institut National
de la Sant et de la Recherche Mdicale  Laura  Fantuzzi,  Istituto
Superiore  di Sanit (ISS), Italy Luis F. Garca Specialty section:
Viral Immunology, Frontiers in Immunology Garca LF (2020)  Immune
Response,  Inflammation,  and  the Clinical Spectrum of COVID‐19.
Front. Immunol. 11:1441.  The current COVID‐19 pandemic began  in
December  2019  in Wuhan (China) and rapidly extended to become a
global sanitary and economic emergency. Its etiological agent  is
the  coronavirus SARS‐CoV‐2. COVID‐19 presents a wide spectrum of
clinical manifestations, which ranges from an asymptomatic infec‐
tion  to  a severe pneumonia accompanied by multisystemic failure
that can lead to a patients death. The immune response  to  SARS‐
CoV‐2 is known to involve all the components of the immune system
that together appear responsible for viral elimination and recov‐
ery  from  the infection.  Nonetheless, such immune responses are
implicated in the diseases progression to COVID‐19 and its  etio‐
logical  agent  SARS‐CoV‐2, stressing the similarities with other
severe coronavirus infections, such as SARS and  MERS,  but  more
importantly, pointing toward the evidence supporting the hypothe‐
sis that the clinical spectrum of COVID‐19 is  a  consequence  of
the  corresponding  variable  spectrum of the immune responses to
the virus. The critical point where progression  of  the  disease
ensues appears to center on loss of the immune regulation between
protective and altered responses due to exacerbation of  the  in‐
flammatory  components. Finally, it appears possible to delineate
certain major challenges deserving of exhaustive investigation to
further  understand  COVID‐19 immunopathogenesis, thus helping to
design more effective diagnostic, therapeutic,  and  prophylactic
strategies.   Keywords:  COVID‐19, SARS‐CoV‐2, immune response, T
cells, antibodies, cytokines, inflammation, spectrum The  current
COVID‐19  pandemic, caused by the coronavirus SARS‐CoV‐2 and ini‐
tiated with the first cases observed in Wuhan (China) in December
2019, has expanded dramatically throughout the world (1, 2). This
expansion has had devastating effects in many  countries  due  to
its  contagiousness  and  the  high number of patients presenting
with severe infections and elevated death  risk,  requiring  spe‐
cialized  medical  care  in  intensive care units (ICU). For this
reason, the WHO declared it a Global Sanitary Emergency on  Janu‐
ary  30,  2020  (3).  An important aspect to highlight during the
present crisis is the speed at which research studies  have  been
developed,  leading toward a better understanding of the epidemi‐
ology, clinical manifestations, risk  factors,  and  transmission
dynamics  (1,  48), as well as to the identification of the etio‐
logical agent (9, 10), including its genome, morphological struc‐
ture,  and molecules (1113), its relationship with other COVID‐19
Clinical and Immune Spectra neutralizing antibodies (31). S is  a
type  I trimeric glycoprotein that protrudes from the virion mem‐
brane, giving it the appearance of a crown. S is  formed  by  two
subunits:  S1,  or bulb, that contains the RBD (3239); and S2, or
stalk, responsible for the fusion of the  virion  with  the  host
cell  membrane (23, 35, 36, As described above, the main receptor
for SARS‐CoV and SARS‐CoV‐2 on the membrane of the  target  cells
is the Angiotensin 2 Converting Enzyme (ACE2), a metallopeptidase
present on the membrane of many cells, including type‐I  and  ‐II
pneumocytes, small intestine enterocytes, kidney proximal tubules
cells, the endothelial cells of arteries and veins, and the arte‐
rial smooth muscle, among other tissues (43, 44). RBDACE2 binding
induces conformational changes on S that lead to cleavage  of  S1
and S2, a process mediated by the serine protease TMPRSS2, allow‐
ing S2 to facilitate the fusion of the virus  envelope  with  the
cell  membrane, thus permitting viral RNA entrance into the cyto‐
plasm of the target cells (23, 31, 35, 42, 45).  Thereafter,  vi‐
ral  RNA serves as a template for the translation of the polypro‐
teins pp1a and pp1b that are cleaved  into  5  16  non‐structural
proteins  (nsp2‐nsp9),  which in turn induce rearrangement of the
membranes to form the vesicles where viral replication and  tran‐
scription  complexes  are  anchored. The virions are assembled in
the ER‐Golgi and mature virions are subsequently released by  the
secretory  pathway  (23).   coronaviruses (14), its entrance into
the host cells by binding the Angiotensin  II  Converting  Enzyme
(ACE2)  (9),  its  intracellular replication (15), and the immune
response of the infected individuals (1619).  All  these  studies
aim  at developing diagnostic tests, strategies for clinical man‐
agement, effective antiviral agents, and  eventually,  production
of  a protective vaccine.  the immune response against SARS‐CoV‐2
and the relationship between the protective and inflammatory  re‐
sponses and COVID‐19 clinical spectrum, ranging from asymptomatic
the principal immunological research challenges posed by COVID‐19
pandemics. The immune response in humans and experimental animals
against infection by SARS‐CoV and MERS‐CoV has been  studied  ex‐
tensively and there are many COVID‐19 with SARS and MERS, it will
be necessary, at certain specific points, to  cite  the  research
done  on  those  infections.  THE VIRUS The virus responsible for
the epidemic that began in Wuhan was simultaneously identified by
Wu  et  al. (9), and by Zhou et al. (10), who named it WH‐Human 1
and 2019‐nCoV, respectively. These  researchers  also  deciphered
the  virus genome, its origin from bat coronaviruses, and ACE2 as
its receptor on the membrane of host cells. On February 11, 2020,
the  WHO officially named the infection COVID‐19 and the virus as
SARS‐CoV‐2 (24).  SARS‐CoV‐2 belongs to the family Coronaviridae,
which  includes  a  large  number of species capable of infecting
various wild animals, some of which also affect humans (2527). In
humans,  most  coronavirus  infections result in mild respiratory
Infections and may be responsible for 2030% of common colds (28).
However,  both  SARS‐CoV  and MERS‐CoV, which emerged in the last
two decades, were responsible for epidemics of severe respiratory
syndromes.  The three coronaviruses causing more serious patholo‐
gies belong to beta‐CoV  (23)  and,  despite  their  genomic  and
structural  similarities, they differ significantly epidemiologi‐
cally. SARS‐CoV and MERS‐CoV have a low  transmissibility  but  a
high  lethality, while SARS‐CoV‐2 has an extremely high transmis‐
sibility and a degree of lethality not yet established  globally.
Coronaviruses  have  a  single‐stranded positive RNA of nearly 30
Kbp, a spheroidal shape, and a diameter of 80120 nm. Their  enve‐
lope  contains the spike S‐, membrane ‐M‐, and envelope ‐E‐, pro‐
teins, and the nucleocapsid ‐N‐ inside the virion that covers the
RNA  (23). On the genome, from 5 to 3 , are located the genes for
the replicases ORF 1a,b which occupy two thirds of the genome and
code for the polyproteins pp1a and pp1b (9, 23, 29).  Located to‐
ward the 3 end are the genes for structural proteins S, E, M, and
N (9, 23, 30).  Protein S is the best studied of the coronavirus‐
es proteins, since it contains the Receptor‐Binding‐Domain  (RBD)
for  the  ligand on the host cell membrane, and also has epitopes
recognized by T and B cells, which induce the production  of  THE
INFECTION The COVID‐19 pathological process exhibits a wide spec‐
trum of clinical manifestations, ranging from asymptomatic infec‐
tions,  to  mild (common cold‐type), moderate, and finally severe
(15%) infections; the latter frequently requires  hospitalization
in  ICU  to ensure assisted respiratory support and other medical
treatments until recovery, or possibly death, of the patient. The
wide  spectrum  of  clinical manifestations found in COVID‐19 pa‐
tients has been associated with risk factors such as  gender  and
age. Diabetes, cardiovascular disease, or diseases, or treatments
affecting the immune system result in the highest risk of  severe
disease and death (6, 8, 8, 4648). It is, however, estimated that
nearly 80% of all infections remain undocumented, either  because
patients  are  asymptomatic  or  present  with very mild symptoms
(49). From the epidemiological point of view, these  inapparently
infected  persons  may have low viral loads, while still dissemi‐
nating the virus and can  therefore  be  responsible  either  for
silent epidemics, leading to infection in more susceptible people
who will eventually develop a clinical disease, or for contribut‐
ing  to  the establishment of herd immunity (28, 50).  SARS‐CoV‐2
is acquired by exposure to microdroplets present in the exhalates
of  infected  individuals or by contact with reaches the bronchi‐
oles and alveolar spaces, the main targets are the cells  of  the
bronchial  epithelium  and  the  type‐II ACE2+ pneumocytes of the
alveolar epithelium. SARS‐CoV infection  induces  autophagy  (51,
52), detachment of the basal membrane, and inhibition of ACE2 ex‐
pression (20, 53), hence allowing  angiotensin  II  to  bind  the
AT1aR receptor, resulting in acute lung COVID‐19 Clinical and Im‐
mune Spectra ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSE damage  (54).  Importantly,
the main early defense mechanism of the infected cell is the pro‐
duction of type‐I and type ‐III IFN and,  although  coronaviruses
are  sensitive  to their anti‐viral effects, they are able to in‐
hibit its induction (16, 20, 52, 55). The release of large number
of  virions  leads  to both infection of neighboring target cells
and viremia, the latter resulting  in  systemic  infection  since
ACE2+ cells are widely distributed in many The transition between
innate and adaptive immune responses is critical for the clinical
progress  of  SARS‐CoV‐2 infection.  It is at this crucial moment
when immune regulatory events, still poorly understood, will lead
to  the  development of either a protective immune response or an
exacerbated inflammatory response (18, 19, 58, 59).  The  protec‐
tive  response  is  T  cell  dependent, with CD4 helping B cells,
geared toward the production of specific neutralizing antibodies,
and cytotoxic CD8 cells capable of eliminating infected cells. It
is worth noting that 80% of the infiltrating  cells  in  COVID‐19
are  CD8 (16).  Contrariwise, a dysfunctional response, unable to
inhibit viral replication and elimination of the infected  cells,
may result in an exacerbated inflammatory response leading possi‐
bly to a cytokine storm, manifested clinically  by  severe  acute
respiratory  distress  syndrome (ARDS) and systemic consequences,
such as disseminated intravascular  coagulation.  In  a  SARS‐CoV
primate  model  of  infection,  Clay  et al. (60) showed that the
virus replicated in the lungs until Day 10  post‐infection;  but,
surprisingly,  lung  inflammation  was  more  intense after virus
clearance, reaching its peak at Day 14 and remaining so until Day
28.  These results suggest that an early phase dependent on virus
replication does occur,  while  a  later  viral‐independent,  im‐
munedependent phase seems to be accompanied by an exacerbated in‐
flammatory component. The viral‐independent phase  has  been  ex‐
plained by the inflammatory reaction secondary to ACE2 inhibition
or by an autoimmune  phenomenon  due  to  the  epitope  spreading
caused by prolonged tissue destruction (20, 61). It remains to be
demonstrated whether a similar two‐phase course  also  occurs  in
COVID‐19.   Although  T  and B cells, macrophages, and DCs do not
express ACE2, some reports suggest that DC‐SIGN may  serve  as  a
trans  receptor for SARS‐CoV on DCs, which even when not infected
may transfer the virus to other susceptible cells (22,  23,  62).
Recently,  Vandakari  and  Wilce  (63)  reported  that  CD26,  an
aminopeptidase involved in T cell activation, may bind to  the  S
protein of SARS‐CoV‐2, resulting in a nonproductive T cell infec‐
tion; Wang et al. (64) reported that CD147, a protein of the  im‐
munoglobulins  superfamily that induces the metalloproteinases of
the extracellular matrix, binds to the S1 domain and  facilitates
viral  entrance  into host cells. The significance of non‐produc‐
tive T cells infection is not clear; however, it is  tempting  to
speculate  that it may be related to the lymphopenia found in pa‐
tients with SARS, MERS, and COVID19 (65). The  binding  of  SARS‐
CoV‐2  S protein to molecules like CD26 and CD147, which partici‐
pate in T cell activation, would suggest that a non‐productive  T
cell  infection  may  result  in  activation‐induced  cell  death
(AICD). MERS‐CoV has been reported to induce  T  cells  apoptosis
(23, 66), and there is evidence that T cells are functionally ex‐
hausted in patients with severe THE INNATE IMMUNE RESPONSE During
viral  infections,  after  viruses  enter the host cells they are
recognized by Pattern Recognition Receptors (PRR)  such  as  TLR7
and  TLR8  in the case of single‐stranded RNA viruses, RIG‐I‐like
(RLRs), and NLR, all expressed by epithelial cells as well as  by
local  cells  of  the  innate  immune  response, such as alveolar
macrophages (23). Upon ligand binding, PRRs recruit adaptor  pro‐
teins  which  activate  crucial downstream transcription factors,
including interferon regulatory factor (IRF), NF‐B, and AP‐1, re‐
sulting  in production of the Type‐I and ‐III antiviral Interfer‐
ons and different chemokines (56). These chemokines attract  more
innate  response  cells [polymorphonuclear leukocytes, monocytes,
NK cells, dendritic cells (DC)], which also  produce  chemokines,
such as MIG, IP‐10, and MCP‐1, capable of recruiting lymphocytes,
which in turn, will recognize the viral antigens presented by DCs
(20, 22). Recent publications highlight the initial phases of the
SARS‐CoV‐2 infection, compared to other  coronavirus,  and  their
effects  on subsequent immune and inflammatory responses.  Chu et
al. (57) compared the in vitro infection of human  lung  explants
with  SARS‐CoV  and SARS‐CoV‐2 and demonstrated that both viruses
can equally infect type‐I  and  ‐II  pneumocytes,  plus  alveolar
macrophages,  although  SARS‐CoV2 had a better capacity to repli‐
cate in pulmonary tissues. Interestingly, while SARS‐CoV  induced
the expression of IFN‐I, IFN‐II, and IFNIII, SARS‐CoV‐2 failed to
induce any such immune mediators and was also less  efficient  in
inducting  other cytokines. SARSCoV induced the production of the
11 cytokines studied, while SARS‐CoV‐2 induced only  five  (IL‐6,
MCP1,  CXCL1,  CXCL5,  and  CXCL10/IP10). Blanco‐Melo et al. (55)
studied the transcriptional response to SARS‐CoV‐2,  compared  to
SAR‐CoV,  MERS‐CoV,  respiratory  syncytial  virus (RSV), parain‐
fluenza virus 3 (HPIV3), and influenza A virus (IAV), in in vitro
infection  of respiratory cell lines, experimental in vivo infec‐
tion of ferrets, and post‐mortem lung  samples  of  COVID‐19  pa‐
tients.  Their  results show that SARS‐CoV‐2 induces a particular
signature characterized by reduced IFN‐I  and  IFN‐III  responses
and significant induction of multiple proinflammatory chemokines,
IL‐1B, IL‐6, TNF, and IL1RA. These findings were further support‐
ed  by  the increased serum levels of these molecules in COVID‐19
patients. Altogether, these reports strongly suggest  that  SARS‐
CoV‐2  differs from other coronaviruses in its capacity to repli‐
cate within the pulmonary tissue, elude from  the  antiviral  ef‐
fects of IFN‐I and IFN‐III, activate innate responses, and induce
the production of the cytokines required for the  recruitment  of
adaptive  immunity  cells.   THE  ANTIBODY RESPONSE Multiple evi‐
dences support  that  the  humoral  response,  mainly  antibodies
against the S protein, blocks virus attachment to COVID‐19 Clini‐
cal and Immune Spectra susceptible ACE2+ cells (33, 41, 68,  69).
However,  there  are  still many questions regarding the signifi‐
cance of antibodies against the different viral proteins, and the
cross reactivity of antibodies against other highly prevalent al‐
pha‐ and beta‐coronavirus, although it seems that cross reactivi‐
ty occurs mostly within the beta‐coronaviridae (61, 70), particu‐
larly between SARS‐CoV and SARS‐CoV‐2 that share 90% of the amino
acid  sequence in S1 (31). However, it can also happen with other
antigens, as demonstrated in the outbreak of HCoV‐OC43 in British
Columbia  (Canada)  where  cross  reactivity of anti‐N antibodies
with SARS‐CoV was found (71). In this respect, it is  interesting
that  there  is no information regarding whether survivors of the
SARS and MERS epidemics became infected with SARS‐CoV‐2,  and  if
so, the nature of their clinical and immunological behavior.  IgM
and IgA antibodies can be detected early during the 1st  week  of
symptom  onset, whereas IgG can be detected at around 14 days af‐
ter the initiation of symptoms (61, 70, 72); however,  given  the
short  time elapsed since the beginning of the COVID‐19 pandemic,
it is not known how long the protecting levels of these  blocking
antibodies will remain active.  Nevertheless, in a cohort of SARS
survivors followed for 6 years, Tang et al. (73) found that anti‐
SARS‐CoV  antibodies  specific  memory  B cells, whereas specific
memory T cells were present in 14/23 (60.9%)  of  the  SARS  sur‐
vivors  studied. Although the diagnostic value of the serological
tests for COVID‐19 is not yet fully defined (70, 7476), it should
be  stated  that  the  study  of the antibodies against different
SARS‐CoV‐2 antigens, in  different  populations  and  at  various
times  during  the  pandemic, would be an important way of under‐
standing the dynamics of transmission  and  seroprevalence  as  a
proxy  to herd immunity.  Furthermore, it is equally important to
conduct  serial  antibody  titers  measurements  in  cohorts   of
COVID‐19 survivors in order to determine how long the immune mem‐
ory remains active and its effect on the possible reemergence  of
SARS‐CoV‐2,  or  other  coronavirus  outbreaks.   Ho  et al. (87)
studying the antibody response in SARS, found that patients  with
more  severe clinical courses had earlier and higher antibody re‐
sponses, and hypothesized that earlier responders may  have  had,
during  the  acute phase, cross‐reacting antibodies with non‐SARS
coronaviruses. Jaume et al. (88) and Yip et al.  (89) demonstrat‐
ed  that  anti‐S  antibodies,  while inhibiting viral entrance in
permissive cells, potentiated the infection by binding to IgG  Fc
receptor‐II   positive   (FcRII+   )  cells,  like  B  cells  and
macrophages. Thus,  IgG  anti‐S  antibodies  bound  to  FcRII  on
mononuclear  phagocyte  membranes  enhance viral entrance through
canonical viral‐receptor pathways, as recently shown for MERS‐CoV
(90),  thereby activating these cells and inducing the production
of proinflammatory cytokines.  THE CLINICAL‐IMMUNOGICAL  SPECTRUM
OF  COVID‐19  In order to understand COVID‐19 immunopathogenesis,
it is important to elucidate what lies at the root of immune  re‐
sponse  failure  occurring  in  infected individuals resulting at
times in deviation of the protective response into a dysfunction‐
al  program,  leading to cytokine release syndrome (CRS) with se‐
vere inflammation and, eventually, a  multi‐systemic  failure.  A
better  understanding of these events would contribute to the de‐
sign of differential therapeutic  approaches,  depending  on  the
stage  of  the disease, and to the delineation of prognostic, and
predictive biomarkers. Unfortunately, there are no studies on the
immune response in infected asymptomatic individuals, which would
allow a better characterization of the protective immune response
as  it  occurs  under  the  natural  conditions  of the infection
process.  Thus, the present view is based on the  comparison  be‐
tween  patients  with  moderate and those with severe infections,
and also with those in the convalescent stage. Another aspect  to
be explored is the effect of previous exposure to other less vir‐
ulent coronaviruses that may have cross‐reactivity with more vir‐
ulent  ones. Additionally, most of the studies have been done us‐
ing blood samples, which do not necessarily  correlate  with  the
events  going  on  in  the affected tissues. Fortunately, several
studies on discussed below.  From an immunological point of view,
the  wide  clinical  spectrum  of COVID‐19 allows us to postulate
different hypotheses,  some  of  them  which  have  already  been
proven,  outcomes during the course of COVID‐19 and allows for an
analysis of the immune response at each clinical stage.  However,
it  must be noted that the immune response is conditioned by epi‐
demiological variables, such as intensity and duration  of  expo‐
sure to the virus and possible variations in viral virulence and,
on the host side, genetic  susceptibility/resistance  and  health
conditions  at  the  time of exposure. The latter includes, among
other variables, age and the existence of comorbidities that  may
directly  affect the immune system (8, 48).  Despite its high in‐
fectivity, not everyone exposed  to  SARSCoV‐2  becomes  infected
(15).  The  reasons for such resistance are The Role of Secretory
Immunoglobulin a It is worth noting that the  role  of  secretory
immunoglobulin  A  (sIgA)  in COVID‐19 has received little atten‐
tion, despite the fact that SARS‐CoV‐2 enters  the  body  through
the respiratory mucosa and sIgA is fundamental to the mucosal de‐
fenses.  Furthermore, several studies into  COVID‐19  have  shown
the  presence  of serum IgA against SARS‐CoV‐2 (70, 7779) and, in
preclinical studies with anti‐SARS vaccines, administered  either
sub‐lingually  or  intranasally, the presence of neutralizing IgA
was demonstrated in bronchoalveolar lavages (8082).  These  find‐
ings support the importance of investigating the presence of sIgA
in secretions of patients with COVID‐19 and defining its possible
anti‐viral  neutralizing  activity  in  respiratory  tract mucosa
(83).  Antibody‐Dependent Enhancement (ADE) An intriguing phenom‐
enon  that  worries  many clinicians and researchers is the Anti‐
body‐Dependent Enhancement (ADE), which could be  linked  to  the
severity of coronavirus infections and could possibly create dif‐
ficulties with new vaccines (8486).  COVID‐19 Clinical and Immune
Spectra  MERS  (100). Xu et al. (101) described bilateral diffuse
alveolar damage (DAD) with cellular fibromyxoid exudates, pneumo‐
cytes desquamation and hyaline membrane formation, multinucleated
syncytial cells, atypical enlarged pneumocytes with large nuclei,
amphophilic  granular  cytoplasm, and prominent nucleoli, as well
as interstitial mononuclear infiltration. Zhang et al. (47)  also
reported  DAD with denudation of the alveolar epithelia, reactive
type‐II pneumocyte hyperplasia, intra‐alveolar fibrinous exudate,
and  loose  fibrous plugs, along with loose interstitial fibrosis
an anti‐Rp3 NP of SARS‐CoV‐2, demonstrated the  presence  of  the
virus on alveolar epithelial cells, including damaged, desquamat‐
ed cells within the alveolar space, but  its  presence  was  only
minimally  detected  on  the  blood vessels and the interstitium.
Taken together, the histopathological findings in COVID‐19 fatal‐
ities  support  that, in addition to the direct cytopathic effect
of SARS‐CoV‐2 on the pneumocytes, an immunological  response  ex‐
ists  that  includes a severe inflammatory reaction and extensive
lung damage (22).  still unknown. It is possible  that  a  small,
occasional  inoculum  does not reach the lower respiratory tract,
where susceptible target cells are found.  Nevertheless,  as  yet
unidentified  genetic conditions may also explain this per se re‐
sistance. On this regard, no association of SARS with ACE2  poly‐
morphisms  was  A  central  tenet  of  our  view  on COVID‐19 im‐
munopathogenesis is that a protective  immune  response  must  be
present  in  patients  with asymptomatic and mild infections, and
even in some with moderate infections who do not progress to  se‐
vere  disease.  This response must be capable of inhibiting viral
replication and eliminating the hosts infected cells with minimal
tissue  damage and low inflammatory manifestations genetic condi‐
tions for viral antigen presentation by HLA‐I and II molecules to
CD8  and  CD4  T cells, respectively. In this context, Grifoni et
al. (92), using a bioinformatic approach, identified  241  candi‐
date epitopes for HLA‐II alleles in SARS‐CoV‐2, and 628 for class
I alleles, which may be bound by the more common HLA alleles, ir‐
respective  of  their  ethnic group. The high number of epitopes,
also present in SARS‐CoV (93), may explain the lack of a  consis‐
tent  association  of SARS with HLA antigens (9498).  THE IMMUNO‐
LOGICAL PROFILE OF COVID‐19 PATIENTS There is consensus  that  in
severe  COVID‐19 infection, an exacerbated pulmonary and systemic
inflammatory response occurs, with increased serum levels of  in‐
flammatory  markers, such as C‐reactive protein (CRP), lactic de‐
hydrogenase (LDH), In patients with  COVID‐19,  the  post  mortem
histopathological  findings are similar to those reported in SARS
(99) and COVID‐19 Clinical and Immune Spectra  and  the  perforin
content  of  NK  and  CD8+ cells, which also negatively correlate
with the increased number of circulating myeloid‐derived suppres‐
sor  cells  (MDSC)  (109).  Although  the number of CD4 cells de‐
creased, they expressed activation markers such  as  CD69,  CD38,
CD44,  and  HLA‐DR,  including  Th17  CD4+ CCR6+ cells, (108). NK
cells also decreased in both moderate and  severe  cases  of  the
disease  (107, 110).  Monocytopenia is also found in COVID‐19 pa‐
tients, particularly in severe cases, but the  circulating  mono‐
cytes belong mainly to the CD14+ CD16+ inflammatory monocyte sub‐
set (108).  ferritin, D‐dimer, and IL‐6 (2, 5, 6, 67,  102),  all
of which may result in cytokine storm (102104), similarly to SARS
and MERS patients with moderate and severe COVID‐19.  Changes  in
Circulating  Cells  Regarding cellular changes, most studies show
that lymphopenia, although present  in  moderate  infections,  is
more pronounced in severe COVID‐19 (17, 108) and affects mainly T
cells, including CD4 Th1 and Tregs, but particularly CD8 (17, 48,
108110).   Also,  in  severe  COVID‐19  the number of circulating
naive T cells increases and the number of memory T cells decreas‐
es (106). Circulating CD8 in patients with severe COVID 19 exhib‐
ited phenotypes  associated  with  abnormal  functionality  (CD8+
IFN‐+  GM‐CSF+  )  and  exhaustion (Tim3+ Pd‐1+ ) (108) or (NKG2+
CD107a+ IFN‐+ grzB+ ) (67). The latter phenotype is also found in
NK cells. Interestingly, a negative correlation has been reported
between  serum  levels  of  IL‐6  and   IL‐8   Changes   in   Cy‐
tokine/Chemokine Plasma Plasma levels of cytokines and chemokines
are also increased in COVID‐19, but are higher in  severe  infec‐
tions,  and  includes  IL‐2, IL‐2R, IL‐6, IL‐7, IL‐8 IL‐10, IP10,
MIP1A, and TNF (5, 17, 106, 109, 110). High levels  of  plasmatic
IL‐6  have been consistently reported in COVID‐19 and even appear
to be associated with poor prognosis and risk of death (8). Thus,
its  measurement has been proposed as a good biomarker to monitor
these patients. Liu et al. (111) studied sixty COVID‐19 patients,
half  of whom had a severe case of the disease and high IL‐6 lev‐
els.  Baseline IL‐6 was higher in more severe cases and correlat‐
ed  with  bilateral  interstitial  lung involvement and high body
temperature, as well as with other serum markers  for  acute  in‐
flammation.  Of  the 30 patients with severe disease, 25 improved
clinically and showed a  significant  decrease  in  IL‐6  levels,
while  these levels increased in three patients with disease pro‐
gression. Coomes et al. (112) performed a meta‐analysis of 16 pa‐
pers, that included 10,798 Chinese patients, in order to test the
evidence that IL‐6 levels correlate with COVID‐19  severity,  and
the effectiveness of treatment with Tocilizumab, a humanized mon‐
oclonal antibody against IL‐6 receptor. All COVID‐19 patients had
increased levels of serum IL‐6, but it was 2.9‐fold higher in pa‐
tients with severe COVID‐19.  Twenty‐one  patients  treated  with
tocilizumab  improved  clinically  with  no  adverse  effects  or
deaths. Also, Xu et al. (113) reported very promising results us‐
ing  Tocilizumab  treatment  in 20 patients with severe COVID‐19;
all patients improved remarkably within a few days and  all  were
discharged  from the ICU within an average of 15 days.  TABLE 1 |
Clue immunological findings in blood of patients with moderate or
severe  COVID‐19.   COVID‐19 moderate COVID‐19 severe Zhou et al.
No data Huang et al.
 IL‐2, IL‐7, IP10, MIP1A, TNF Wu et al.
 PMNs,  Lymphocytes,
 IL‐6 (at risk of death) Qin et al.  No data
 PMNs,  Lymphocytes, T (Th1 y Tregs),  B,  NK;   T  Chen  et  al.
IL‐2R, IL‐6, IL‐10, TNF;
 Lymphocytes, CD4 and IL‐2R, IL‐6, IL‐10.TNF Wan et al.
 CD4, CD8, B, NK
 IL‐4, IL‐10, IL‐17, TNF,
 CD4, CD8, B, NK Zheng et al.
 CD8, NK (NKG2+ CD107a+ IFN+ grzB+ )
 CD8,  NK  (NKG2+  CD107a+ IFN+ grzB+ ) Lei et al.  NK, T CD25+ ,
PD‐1 Zhou et al.
 Lymphocytes,  Monocytes, CD4;  PMNs, B, NK;
 MonocytesCD14+ CD16+
 IL‐2R, IL‐6, IL‐8, IL‐10 Xu et al.  Bordoni et al.  Dynamics  of
the  Immune and Inflammatory During the course of COVID‐19 infec‐
tion, viral replication, immune response, and inflammatory  reac‐
tion  are  dynamic  events  that can change rapidly, resulting in
different outcomes; several reports have addressed these changes.
Thevarajan et al.  (114) reported the case of a patient with mild
to moderate infection that was clinically, virologically, and im‐
munologically  followed over the course of the disease, including
her recovery 13  days  after  the  initiation  of  symptoms,  and
through to Day 20 at which point she had recovered. The virus was
detected on Days 4 IgM and IgG  anti‐SARS‐CoV‐2  antibodies  pro‐
gressively increase from Day 7 through to Day 20. Circulating an‐
tibody‐secreting B cells, CD3 CD19+ CD27hi CD38hi ,  appeared  in
the blood at (CD69+ CD38+ CD44+ ), CD8+ IFN‐+ GM‐CSF+
 MonocytesCD14+ CD16+ CD4+ CCR6+ Th17
 Lymphocytes,  CD3,
 IL‐1b, IL‐6, Il‐8,TNF
 Lymphocytes,  CD3, MDSC,  NKperf+
 IL‐1b, IL‐6, Il‐8,TNF
 , normal values; , decreased, , severe decreased; , increased, ,
severe COVID‐19 Clinical and Immune Spectra  2  The  simultaneous
presence of other viruses in the mucosa of the respiratory tract,
common in children, could limit the growth of SARS‐CoV‐2  by  di‐
rect  virus‐to‐virus  competition;  3 The treatment with ACE2 in‐
hibitors and angiotensin receptors blockers, a  common  procedure
in  hypertensive  adults, upregulates ACE2 expression, increasing
susceptibility to SARSCoV‐2 infection. These  theoretical  possi‐
bilities  require clinical and experimental validation.  the time
of viral clearance (Day 7), peaked on Day 8,  and  remained  high
through  to Day 20. Follicular helper T cells (TFH ), CD4+ CXCR5+
ICOS+ PD‐1+ , were also detected on Day 7 and continued  increas‐
ing  through  to  Day  20.  Activated cytotoxic CD8 T cells, CD8+
CD38+ HLA‐DR+ , were also present on Day 7, increased through  to
Day 9, and then decreased through to Day 20, although with values
higher than in healthy controls. There was no increase in inflam‐
matory  CD14+ CD16+ monocytes, nor in activated NK CD3 CD56+ HLA‐
DR+ cells. Regarding serum cytokines, of the 17  pro‐inflammatory
cytokines  studied,  only  low  levels of MCP1/CCL2 were found on
Days 79. This case is interesting since there are very few  stud‐
ies  on patients with mild infections and because IgM and IgG an‐
tibodies, antibody secreting B cells, CD4 TFH cells, and activat‐
ed  cytotoxic CD8 cells were shown to be circulating before reso‐
lution of the symptoms.  Ong et  al.  (115)  compared  the  blood
transcriptional  profile of three patients in early phases of In‐
fection ‐one of whom evolved to a severe disease‐ with 10 healthy
volunteers.  The  main  findings in the patient who progressed to
severe disease was that only IL‐1A and IL‐1B preceded  the  nadir
of  the respiratory function, and that the expression of most in‐
flammatory genes, particularly IL‐6, IL‐2,  TNF‐,  and  IFNA1/13,
peaked  thereafter. Also, in this patient, transcripts associated
with HLA, CD4, and CD8 T cell activation were  diminished,  while
in  the  other  two patients, who did not progress to severe dis‐
ease, the transcription profile that in the first  case  the  de‐
creased  T  cell  activation may have helped the inflammatory re‐
sponse by the IL‐1 pathway, while in the other two cases the  low
inflammatory  response allowed a moderate T cell response.  STUD‐
IES IN BRONCHOALVEOLAR LAVAGE Findings in blood do not necessari‐
ly  explain  the events occurring in tissues directly affected by
the infection, thus studies in Xiong et al. (127) used RNA‐seq to
study  BALFs  and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) tran‐
scriptome from three COVID‐19 patients (unfortunately their clin‐
ical  conditions  were  not reported) and from three healthy sub‐
jects. The BALF cells in these patients  expressed  9,609  genes,
679 of which were up‐regulated and 325 down‐regulated, as opposed
to controls.  In PBMC, 15,726 genes were expressed, with 707  up‐
regulated and 316 down‐regulated. BALF cells from patients showed
a differential expression of genes related to viral invasion  and
replication  (viral  RNA  was  detected in BALFs of all three pa‐
tients) such as membrane‐associated proteins, endoplasmic reticu‐
lum, and viral transcription. In contrast, PBMCs showed increased
expression of genes related to complement activation, immunoglob‐
ulins,  and  B  cell‐mediated  responses, while some genes corre‐
sponded to the acute inflammatory  response.  The  down‐regulated
genes  in  patients BALF were mostly related to activation of the
immune response. Comparison of the cytokine genes showed that  in
BALFs the genes for IL‐10, CCL2/MCP‐1 (together with its CCR2 re‐
ceptor), CXCL10/IP‐10, CCL3/MIP1A (together with its CCR5  recep‐
tor),  and  CCL4/MIP1B  were differentially up‐regulated. Another
relevant finding was that in PBMC, genes  related  to  autophagy,
apotopsis,  and  p53  pathways  were up‐regulated, a finding that
could be related to the lymphopenia detected  in  the  three  pa‐
tients.  Interestingly,  IL‐6  transcripts  were not increased in
PBMCs, although the patients had high plasma levels of  such  cy‐
tokine,  suggesting  that  Effect  of Age One of the risk factors
most strongly associated with severe COVID‐19 and  death  is  ad‐
vanced  age.  Immunosenescence present in the elderly affects in‐
nate immunity (116), but mainly  T  cell‐dependent  adaptive  re‐
sponses  (117120).  In  addition,  experimental evidence suggests
that elderly mice have increased levels  of  proinflammatory  cy‐
tokines and that their alveolar macrophages are refractory to ac‐
tivation by IFN‐ (121). This finding is relevant since  the  pro‐
tective  response  that eliminates the virus depends on cytotoxic
CD8 cells and Th1 responses, with IFN‐ playing an important  role
in  both  responses, as demonstrated in SARS and MERS (122, 123).
Increased susceptibility in the elderly to  present  with  severe
COVID‐19  forms  contrasts  with  the lower frequency of these 45
publications on COVID‐19 and found that 15% of the  patients  are
children  who,  although  they present with fever and respiratory
symptoms, experience milder symptoms and among whom death was ex‐
tremely  rare. The increase in inflammatory markers and lymphocy‐
topenia were also less common in children. Brodin (125) postulat‐
ed  the following three explanations for the milder COVID‐19 pre‐
sentation in children: TABLE 2 | Differentially  expressed  genes
(DEGs) up‐regulated in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) of pa‐
tients with moderate or severe COVID‐19.  1 The  immune  response
is qualitatively different in children and adults, something that
has been extensively studied (126); Up‐regulated genes  Xiong  et
al.  (127)  IL‐10,  CCL2/MCP‐1,  CCR2, CXCL10/IP‐10, CCL3/MIP‐1A,
CCR5, and CCL4/MIP1B Liao et al. (128) FCN1hi ;  FCN1lo  SPP1+  ;
FCN1  SPP1  inflammatory  monocytes/macrophages in severe disease
CD8 activation and effector molecules and higher CD8  TCR  reper‐
toire in moderate illness Zhou et al. (129) CXCL17, CXCL8 and CX‐
CL2, CXCR2, CCL2, CCL7 IL‐1, ISGs, IL‐17, TNF, and NF‐B signaling
COVID‐19  Clinical and Immune Spectra circulating IL‐6 could have
been produced in the lungs, either by alveolar  epithelial  cells
or  by  recruited  inflammatory cells.  In another study, Liao et
al. (128) used scRNA‐seq and scTCRseq  to  determine  BALF  cells
transcriptional  signature  in three patients with severe and an‐
other three with moderate COVID19, and compared them  with  eight
healthy  subjects,  previously  studied. Their main findings were
related to macrophages and CD8 cells. Macrophages  were  predomi‐
nant  in  BALFs from patients with severe infection, with a minor
proportion of T and NK cells, as compared with patients with mod‐
erate  disease.   Macrophages were classified in 22 clusters, ac‐
cording to their  expression  of  FCN1  (monocyte‐derived),  SPP1
(pro‐fibrotic),  and  FABP4  (alveolar  macrophages). These genes
were differentially expressed both among the two  groups  of  pa‐
tients  and  the  healthy  controls. FABP4 was preferentially ex‐
pressed  in  healthy  controls  and  in  patients  with  moderate
COVID‐19, while FCN1 and SPP1 were expressed in patients with se‐
vere COVID‐19. Further  macrophages  classification  resulted  in
four  groups: Group 1, FCN1hi only; Group 2, FCN1lo SPP1+ ; Group
3, FCN1 SPP1+ ; and Group 4, FABP4+ .  Group  1  macrophages  ex‐
pressed genes associated with inflammatory monocytes; Group 2 ex‐
pressed chemokines and interferon stimulated genes  (ISG);  Group
3,  genes  related with immune regulation and profibrotic events;
and Group 4 were alveolar macrophage typical genes. According  to
the  investigators,  these  results suggest that during SARS‐CoV2
infection, inflammatory monocytes (FCN1+ ) are recruited from the
circulation  into  the lungs, where they differentiate into SPP1+
macrophages, constituents of the  severe  inflammatory  reaction.
Analysis of the BALF transcriptome showed that T and NK cells are
increased in COVID‐19 patients,  compared  to  healthy  controls,
which according to their gene expression can be classified in NK,
CD8, CD4, Tregs, and proliferating cells.  An  important  finding
was that genes related to activating molecules, migration, calci‐
um signaling, and effector molecules were highly expressed by CD8
cells in patients with moderate infection, compared with patients
with severe COVID‐19; this further supports the role of CD8 cells
in  the elimination of the virus and their subsequent, protective
immunity. In contrast, patients with severe disease had a  higher
expression  of genes related to proliferation, energy generation,
and initiation of translation.  These results suggest that in pa‐
tients  with moderate infection CD8 cells are more differentiated
and efficient, while in severe Infection T cells are in a prolif‐
erative  stage. Additionally, the finding that the TCR repertoire
is higher in CD8 than in CD4 cells, suggests a larger clonal  ex‐
pansion of the CD8 cells taking part in the resolution of the in‐
fection.  Zhou et al. (129) used metatranscriptomic sequencing to
profile immune signatures in the BALF of eight COVID‐19 patients,
compared to 146  community‐acquired  pneumonia  patients  and  20
healthy  controls. Their results show that in BALF from COVID‐19,
the differentially expressed genes (DEGs)  included  up‐regulated
proinflammatory  chemokines genes, such as CXCL17, CXCL8, and CX‐
CL2, as well as the CXCR2 receptor, critical  to  neutrophil  re‐
cruitment, and CCL2 and found that COVID‐19 patients up‐regulated
IL‐1, antiviral Interferon stimulated genes (ISGs), and genes re‐
lated  to  the  IL‐17, TNF, and NF‐B signaling pathways. In addi‐
tion, the cellular analysis showed  an  increased  neutrophil  to
lymphocyte  ratio (NLR) in patients with COVID‐19 compared to pa‐
tients with other pneumonias.  Taken together, findings  in  BALF
demonstrate both a highly dysregulated innate and adaptive immune
response in the affected lungs of patients with COVID‐19.  Just 5
months  after  the  initiation of the COVID‐19 pandemic in China,
which extended quickly worldwide to greatly impact public  health
and  economies, the amount of information gathered on all aspects
of the infection and the celerity with  which  the  international
scientific community has shared such information is to be used in
defining new diagnostic, therapeutic, or prophylactic  protocols.
It is also important to consider the brief amount of time elapsed
since the beginning of the pandemic, during which time it has not
been  possible to gather sufficient results from in vitro and ex‐
perimental animal  models  to  ensure  further  understanding  of
COVID‐19s  biology.  Even when considering these limitations, the
information provided by qualitative differences in the immune re‐
sponses of those infected with SARS‐CoV‐2 which seem to correlate
with the clinical manifestations of COVID‐19. Although studies of
asymptomatic  infected individuals are lacking, the immunological
profiles of patients with moderate infections indicate a  protec‐
tive  T  celldependent response, in contrast to patients with se‐
vere disease who exhibit an  exacerbated  systemic  inflammation,
with  signs of T cells exhaustion.  The following fundamental as‐
pects need to be  defined  through  close  collaboration  between
clinicians  and  basic  researchers, with strong support from the
public and private financial agencies: 1 The alterations  of  the
immune  regulation  that  allow  the  disease  to advance from an
asymptomatic or mild infection to  a  severe  disease  with  poor
prognosis.  Translational  immunological research focusing on the
cellular and molecular aspects of the virus‐host interaction, us‐
ing  sophisticated  bioinformatics and system biology tools, must
be pursued. This includes experimental animal models required for
a  deep understanding of COVID19s immunopathogenesis. Besides pa‐
tients with moderate and severe COVID‐19, studies in humans  must
include  seropositive  asymptomatic individuals and patients with
virologically confirmed mild infections. These subjects should be
studied in long‐term follow‐up cohorts.  2 The genetics of resis‐
tance/susceptibility at the various stages of the  infection  and
the disease. Topics like the resistance per se in exposed non‐in‐
fected individuals, and the genetic risk factors for the progres‐
sion  from  asymptomatic  to  moderate and severe disease must be
prioritized. Initiatives like COVID COVID‐19 Clinical and  Immune
Spectra  that  direction.   3  Based on the previous points it is
necessary to find correlates of protective immunity and  prognos‐
tic biomarkers to guide personalized management of infected indi‐
viduals in order to prevent their progression to severe forms  of
the  disease.   4 New pharmacological and immune‐based treatments
must be developed  simultaneously  with  rigorous  evaluation  of
treatments  already  available.  The  analysis  of  the currently
available pharmacological treatments, or those under Possible im‐
munotherapies  may  include: convalescent plasma, already assayed
in a small number of  patients  (131133);  monoclonal  antibodies
against  the IL‐6 receptor (112, 113) and interferon  (134, 135);
and Leronlimab CCR5 blocking antibody (136), among others. Fortu‐
nately,  a  good  number  of controlled clinical assays have been
initiated under strict dist=) which will hopefully provide, with‐
in a prudential time, therapeutic agents for the efficient treat‐
ment of COVID‐19 patients.  5 Development of vaccines to prevent,
and  hopefully eliminate, SARS‐CoV‐2 and other coronavirus infec‐
tions. As expected, many investigators and  biotechnology  compa‐
nies  are dedicating all their efforts and resources to obtaining
an effective vaccine in the shortest time possible. Although this
the different approaches, mostly targeting the S protein with its
RBD. Vaccine candidates include RNA and DNA vaccines, recombinant
proteins,  and vectored vaccines, as well as inactivated and live
attenuated vaccines. The first immunogenicity  of  a  recombinant
adenovirus  type‐5  (Ad5)  vectored expressing S protein of SARS‐
CoV‐2 (138). One hundred ninety‐five participants were  allocated
in  three  dose groups and followed for 28 days post‐vaccination.
Mild adverse reactions were common within the first 7 days  after
vaccination  with  no serious events noted during the observation
period. Neutralizing antibodies  were  detected  at  Day  14  and
peaked at Day 28 post‐vaccination, and specific CD4 and CD8 cells
peaked at Day 14 and remained present through Day 28 in the three
dose groups. It is important to note that development of an effi‐
cient vaccine requires a deep understanding not only of the viral
antigens and epitopes, but also of the immunological events lead‐
ing up to the epitope presentation and recognition  resulting  in
the  establishment  of  a  protective immune memory, the effector
mechanisms in response to the antigens, and the adjuvants present
in  the proposed vaccine, one that would have minimal side Final‐
ly, it is important to remember what many investigators  of  SARS
and  MERS  have  written  in  their publications, long before the
emergency of COVID‐19 pandemics: what will be learned  from  this
pandemic  must  be  used to prevent future coronavirus epidemics.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS To professors Gloria Vsquez  and  Carlos  F.
Narvaez  for  professor Angela Restrepo and Ms. Sally Station for
their valuable suggestions and help in the preparation of the  6.
Chen  T,  Wu  D,  Chen  H, Yan W, Yang D, Chen G, et al. Clinical
characteristics of 113 deceased patients with coronavirus disease
2019:  retrospective study.  7. Kucharski AJ, Russell WT, Diamond
C, Liu Y, Edmunds J, Funk S, et al. Early dynamics  of  transmis‐
sion  and  control  of  COVID19:  a mathematical modelling study.
Lancet Infect Dis. (2020) 29:553 8. Wu C, Chen X, Cai Y,  Xia  J,
Zhou  X, Xu S, et al. Risk factors associated with acute respira‐
tory distress syndrome and death  in  patients  with  coronavirus
disease  2019  pneumonia in Wuhan, China. JAMA Intern Med.  9. Wu
F, Zhao S, Yu B, Chen MY, Wang W, Song GZ, et al.  A  new  coron‐
avirus  associated  with  human respiratory disease in China. Na‐
ture. (2020) 579:265 10. Zhou P, Yang LX, Wang GX, Hu B, Zhang L,
Zhang W, et al. A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coron‐
avirus of probable bat origin. Nature.  11. Wen F, Yu H,  Guo  J,
Li Y, Luo K, Huang S. Identification of the hypervariable genomic
hotspot for the novel coronavirus SARS‐CoV‐2. J Infect.  12. Car‐
denas‐Conejo  Y, Linan‐Rico A, Garcia‐Rodriguez DA, Centeno‐Leija
S, Serrano‐Posada H. An exclusive  42  amino  acid  signature  in
pp1ab protein provides insights into the evolutive history of the
2019 novel 1. Li Q, Guan X, Wu P, Wang X, Zhou L, Tong Y, et  al.
Early  transmission  dynamics  in  Wuhan,  China, of novel coron‐
avirus‐infected 2. Guan WJ, Ni YZ, Hu Y, Liang HW, Ou QC, He  XJ,
et  al.  Clinical  characteristics of coronavirus disease 2019 in
China. N Engl J Med. (2020) 3. World Health Organization.  State‐
ment  on  the  Second Meeting of the International Health Regula‐
tions (2005) Emergency Committee regarding 4.  Chen  N,  Zhou  M,
Dong  X, Qu J, Gong F, Han Y, et al. Epidemiological and clinical
characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel  coronavirus  pneumonia
in  Wuhan,  China: a descriptive study. Lancet. (2020) 395:507 5.
Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, Zhao J, Hu Y, et al. Clinical  fea‐
tures  of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan,
China. Lancet.  COVID‐19 Clinical and Immune Spectra 35. Hoffmann
M,  Kleine‐Weber H, Schroeder S, Kruger N, Herrler T, Erichsen S,
et al. SARS‐CoV‐2 cell entry depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2  and  is
blocked  by  a clinically proven protease inhibitor. Cell. (2020)
181:270 36. Lan J, Ge J, Yu J, Shan S, Zhou  H,  Fan  S,  et  al.
Structure  of  the SARS‐CoV‐2 spike receptor‐binding domain bound
to the ACE2 receptor. Nature. (2020) 37. Liu Z, Xiao X, Wei X, Li
J,  Yang  J,  Tan  H, et al. Composition and divergence of coron‐
avirus spike proteins and host ACE2 receptors  predict  potential
intermediate  hosts of SARS‐CoV‐2. J Med Virol. (2020) 92:595601.
38. Luan J, Lu Y, Jin X, Zhang L. Spike  protein  recognition  of
mammalian  ACE2 predicts the host range and an optimized ACE2 for
SARS‐CoV‐2 infection. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. (2020) 39.  Yan
R,  Zhang Y, Li Y, Xia L, Guo Y, Zhou Q. Structural basis for the
recognition of SARS‐CoV‐2 by  full‐length  human  ACE2.  Science.
(2020)  40.  Wrapp D, Wang N, Corbett SK, Goldsmith AJ, Hsieh LC,
Abiona O, et al.  Cryo‐EM structure of the 2019‐nCoV spike in the
prefusion  conformation.  41. Ou X, Liu Y, Lei X, Li P, Mi D, Ren
L, et al. Characterization of spike glycoprotein of SARS‐CoV‐2 on
virus  entry  and  its immune cross‐reactivity with SARS‐CoV. Nat
Commun. (2020) 42. Shang J, Wan Y, Liu C, Yount B, Gully K,  Yang
Y, et al.  Structure of mouse coronavirus spike protein complexed
with receptor reveals mechanism for  viral  entry.  PLoS  Pathog.
(2020)  43.  Hamming  I, Timens W, Bulthuis LM, Lely TA, Navis G,
van GH. Tissue distribution of ACE2 protein, the  functional  re‐
ceptor  for SARS coronavirus.  A first step in understanding SARS
pathogenesis. J Pathol. (2004) 203:631 44. Zou X, Chen K, Zou  J,
Han P, Hao J, Han Z. Single‐cell RNA‐seq data analysis on the re‐
ceptor ACE2 expression reveals the potential  risk  of  different
human  organs  vulnerable to 2019‐nCoV infection. Front Med.  45.
Letko M, Marzi A, Munster V. Functional assessment of cell  entry
and  receptor usage for SARS‐CoV‐2 and other lineage B betacoron‐
aviruses. Nat 46. Yang J, Zheng Y, Gou X, Pu K, Chen Z, Guo Q, et
al.  Prevalence  of  comorbidities in the novel Wuhan coronavirus
(COVID‐19) infection: 47. Zhang H, Zhou P, Wei Y, Yue H, Wang  Y,
Hu  M, et al. Histopathologic changes and SARS‐CoV‐2 immunostain‐
ing in the lung of a patient with 48. Zhou Y, Zhang  Z,  Tian  J,
Xiong  S.  Risk  factors associated with disease progression in a
cohort of patients infected with the 2019 novel coronavirus.  49.
Fauci AS, Lane CH, Redfield RR. Covid‐19navigating the uncharted.
N Engl 50. Li R, Pei S, Chen B, Song Y, Zhang T, Yang W,  et  al.
Substantial  of  novel  coronavirus  (SARS‐CoV2). Science. (2020)
368:489 51. Fung TS, Liu DX. The ER stress sensor  IRE1  and  MAP
kinase  ERK  modulate  autophagy induction in cells infected with
coronavirus infectious bronchitis 52. Shi CS, Qi YH, Boularan  C,
Huang  NN, Abu‐Asab M, Shelhamer HJ, et al. SARS‐coronavirus open
reading frame‐9b suppresses innate immunity  by  targeting  mito‐
chondria  and the MAVS/TRAF3/TRAF6 53. Kuba K, Imai Y, Rao S, Gao
H, Guo F, Guan B, et al. (2005). A crucial  role  of  angiotensin
converting  enzyme  2 (ACE2) in SARS coronavirus‐induced lung hu‐
man‐pathogenic coronavirus (SARS‐CoV2). J Med Virol. (2020)92:688
Shen  Z, Xiao Y, Kang L, Ma W, Shi L, Zhang L, et al. Genomic di‐
versity of SARS‐CoV‐2 in Coronavirus Disease 2019 patients.  Clin
Infect  Dis. (2020) Andersen KG, Rambaut A, Lipkin IW, Holmes CE,
Garry RF. The proximal origin of SARS‐CoV‐2. Nat Med. (2020)  Shi
Y,  Wang  Y, Shao C, Huang J, Gan J, Huang X, et al. COVID‐19 in‐
fection: the perspectives on immune responses. Cell Death Differ.
(2020)  Li  G,  Fan  Y, Lai Y, Han T, Li Z, Zhou P, et al. Coron‐
avirus infections and Chen G, Wu D, Guo W, Cao Y, Huang  D,  Wang
H,  et al. Clinical and immunological features of severe and mod‐
erate coronavirus disease 2019.  Cao X. COVID‐19: immunopathology
and its implications for therapy. Nat Perlman S, Dandekar AA. Im‐
munopathogenesis of coronavirus Lau YL, Peiris  JS.  Pathogenesis
of severe acute respiratory syndrome. Curr Fung TS, Liu DX. Human
coronavirus: host‐pathogen interaction. Annu Rev World Health Or‐
ganization.  Naming the Coronavirus Disease (COVID‐19 naming‐the‐
coronavirus‐disease‐(covid‐2019)‐and‐the‐virus‐that‐causesit (ac‐
cessed  March 14, 2020).  Li X, Zai J, Zhao Q, Nie Q, Li Y, Foley
TB, et al. Evolutionary history,  potential  intermediate  animal
host,  and  cross‐species  analyses of SARS‐CoV‐2. J Med Li B, Si
RH, Zhu Y, Yang LX, Anderson ED, Shi LZ, et al.  Discovery of bat
coronaviruses  through  surveillance and probe Raoult D, Zumla A,
Locatelli F, Ippolito G, Kroemer G. Coronavirus infections:  epi‐
demiological,  clinical  and  immunological  features and Wang N,
Shang J, Jiang S, Du L. Subunit vaccines against emerging  patho‐
genic  human  coronaviruses.  Front Microbiol. (2020) 11: Chen Y,
Liu Q, Guo D. Emerging coronaviruses: genome structure,  replica‐
tion,  and  pathogenesis.  J Med Virol. (2020) Walls AC, Park JY,
Tortorici AM, Wall A, McGuire TA, Veesler D. Structure, function,
and  antigenicity  of  the  SARS‐CoV‐2  spike glycoprotein. Cell.
Shang J, Ye G, Shi K, Wan Y, Luo C, Aihara H, et  al.  Structural
basis  of  receptor  recognition  by  SARS‐CoV‐2.  Nature. (2020)
581:221 Tai W, He L, Zhang X, Pu J, Voronin D, Jiang  S,  et  al.
Characterization  of  the  receptor‐binding  domain (RBD) of 2019
novel coronavirus: implication for development of RBD protein  as
a viral attachment inhibitor and vaccine. Cell Chen Y, Guo Y, Pan
Y, Zhao  ZJ.  Structure  analysis  of  the  receptor  binding  of
2019‐nCoV.  Biochem  Biophys  Res Commun. (2020) 525:135 COVID‐19
Clinical and Immune Spectra 73. Tang F, Quan Y, Xin ZT,  Wrammert
J, Ma MJ, Lv H, et al. Lack of peripheral B cell memory responses
in recovered patients with Severe Acute Respiratory  Syndrome:  A
six years follow‐up study. J Immunol. (2011) 74. Okba NMA, Muller
AM, Li W, Wang C, GeurtsvanKessel HC, Corman  MV,  et  al.  SARS‐
CoV‐2  specific  antibody  responses  in  COVID‐19 patients.  75.
Petherick A. Developing antibody tests  for  SARS‐CoV‐2.  Lancet.
(2020)  76.  Abbasi  J. The promise and peril of antibody testing
for COVID‐19. JAMA.  77. Haveri A, Smura T, Kuivanen S, Osterlund
P,  Hepojoki J, Ikonen N, et al.  Serological and molecular find‐
ings during SARS‐CoV‐2 infection: the first case  study  in  Fin‐
land,  January  to  February 2020. Euro Surveill. (2020) 78. Okba
NMA, Muller AM, Li W, Wang C, GeurtsvanKessel HC, Corman  MV,  et
al.  Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2‐specific an‐
tibody responses in coronavirus disease 2019 patients. Emerg  In‐
fect Dis. (2020) 79. Patel R, Babady E, Theel SE, Storch AG, Pin‐
sky AB, St. George K, et al. Report from the American Society for
Microbiology  COVID‐19 80. Shim BS, Stadler K, Nguyen HH, Yun HC,
Kim WD, Chang J, et al. Sublingual immunization with  recombinant
adenovirus  encoding  SARS‐CoV spike protein induces systemic and
mucosal immunity without redirection of the virus to  the  brain.
Virol  J. (2012) 81. Du L, Zhao G, Lin Y, Sui H, Chan C, Ma S, et
al. Intranasal vaccination of recombinant adeno‐associated  virus
encoding receptor‐binding domain of severe acute respiratory syn‐
drome coronavirus (SARS‐CoV) spike protein induces strong mucosal
immune  responses and provides long‐term protection against SARS‐
CoV infection. J Immunol. (2008) 180:94856.  82. Lu B,  Huang  Y,
Huang L, Li B, Zheng Z, Chen Z, et al. Effect of respiratory syn‐
drome coronavirus in mice. Immunology. (2010)  130:254  83.  Bene
MC,  de  MC, Eveillard M, Lebri Y. Good IgA bad IgG in SARS‐CoV‐2
84. Peeples L. News feature: avoiding pitfalls in the pursuit  of
a  COVID‐19  vaccine. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. (2020) 117:8218 85.
Tetro JA. Is COVID‐19 receiving ADE from other coronaviruses? Mi‐
crobes  86. Iwasaki A, Yang Y. The potential danger of suboptimal
87. Ho MS, Chen JW, Chen YH, Lin FS, Wang CM, Di J, et  al.  Neu‐
tralizing antibody response and SARS severity. Emerg. Infect Dis.
(2005) 11:1730 88. Jaume M, Yip SM, Cheung YC, Leung LH,  Li  HP,
Kien F, et al. Anti‐severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
spike antibodies trigger infection of human immune  cells  via  a
pH‐  and cysteine protease‐independent 89. Yip MS, Leung HN, Che‐
ung YC, Li HP, Lee HH, Daeron M, et al. Antibodydependent  infec‐
tion  of human macrophages by severe acute respiratory 90. Wan Y,
Shang J, Sun S, Tai W, Chen J, Geng Q, et al. Molecular mechanism
for antibody‐dependent enhancement of coronavirus entry. J Virol.
(2020) 91. Chiu RW, Tang LN, Hui SD, Chung TG, Chim SS, Chan  CK,
et  al.  ACE2  gene polymorphisms do not affect outcome of severe
acute respiratory syndrome.  92. Grifoni A, Sidney  J,  Zhang  Y,
Scheuermann HR, Peters B, Sette A. A sequence homology and bioin‐
formatic approach can predict candidate 54. Imai Y, Kuba  K,  Rao
S,  Huan  Y, Guo F, Guan B, et al. Angiotensinconverting enzyme 2
protects from severe acute lung failure. Nature. (2005) 55. Blan‐
co‐Melo  D,  Nilsson‐Payant BE, Liu CW, Uhl S, Hoagland D, Moller
R, et al. Imbalanced host response to SARS‐CoV‐2 drives  develop‐
ment  of  57.  Chu H, Chan FJ, Wang Y, Yuen TT, Chai Y, Hou Y, et
al. Comparative replication and  immune  activation  profiles  of
SARS‐CoV‐2 and SARS‐CoV in human lungs: an ex vivo study with im‐
plications for the pathogenesis  of  58.  Manjili  RH,  Zarei  M,
Habibi  M, Manjili MH. COVID‐19 as an acute inflammatory disease.
J Immunol. (2020) ji2000413.  59. Felsenstein S, Herbert AJ,  Mc‐
Namara SP, Hedrich CM. COVID19: Immunology and treatment options.
Clin Immunol. (2020) 60. Clay C, Donart N, Fomukong N, Knight BJ,
Lei  W, Price L, et al. Primary severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus infection limits replication but not  lung  inflamma‐
tion  upon  homologous rechallenge. J Virol. (2012) 61. Huang AT,
Garcia‐Carreras B, Hitchings TDM, Yang B,  Katzelnick  L,  coron‐
aviruses:  antibody kinetics, correlates of protection, and asso‐
ciation of antibody responses with severity of  disease.  medRxiv
[Preprint].  (2020).   62.  Yang  ZY, Huang Y, Ganesh L, Leung K,
Kong PW, Schwartz O, et al. pH‐dependent entry  of  severe  acute
respiratory  syndrome coronavirus is mediated by the spike glyco‐
protein and enhanced by dendritic cell transfer through  DC‐SIGN.
J  Virol.  (2004)  63.  Vankadari  N, Wilce JA. Emerging COVID‐19
coronavirus: glycan shield and structure prediction of spike gly‐
coprotein  and  its interaction with human CD26. Emerg Microb In‐
fect. (2020) 64. Wang K, Chen W, Zhou SY, Lian Q‐J, Zhang  Z,  Du
P,  et  al.  SARSCoV‐2  invades  host  cells  via  a novel route:
CD147‐spike protein. bioRxiv.  65. Wang X, Xu W, Hu G, Xia S, Sun
Z,  Liu  Z,  et  al. SARS‐CoV‐2 infects T lymphocytes through its
spike protein‐mediated membrane fusion. Cell Mol  66.  Huang  IC,
Bailey CC, Weyer LJ, Radoshitzky RS, Becker MM, Chiang JJ, et al.
Distinct patterns of IFITM‐mediated restriction  of  filoviruses,
SARS  coronavirus, and influenza A virus. PLoS Pathog. (2011) 67.
Zheng M, Gao Y, Wang G, Song G, Liu S, Sun D, et  al.  Functional
exhaustion  of  antiviral  lymphocytes in COVID‐19 patients. Cell
Mol Immunol. (2020) 68. He Y, Zhou Y, Liu S, Kou Z, Li W,  Farzan
M,  et  al. Receptor‐binding domain of SARS‐CoV spike protein in‐
duces highly potent neutralizing antibodies: implication for  de‐
veloping  subunit  vaccine.  Biochem  Biophys  Res  Commun.   69.
Bonavia A, Zelus DB, Wentworth ED, Talbot JP, Holmes KV.  Identi‐
fication  of  a receptor‐binding domain of the spike glycoprotein
of human coronavirus 70. Guo L, Ren L, Yang S, Xiao M,  Chang  D,
Yang F, et al. Profiling early humoral response to diagnose novel
coronavirus disease (COVID‐19). Clin Infect Dis.  71. Patrick DM,
Petric  M,  Skowronski  MD, Guasparini R, Booth FT, Krajden M, et
al. An outbreak of human coronavirus OC43 infection and serologi‐
cal  cross‐reactivity  with  SARS coronavirus. Canad J Infect Dis
Med Microbiol.  72. Theel ES, Slev P, Wheeler  S,  Couturier  RM,
Wong JS, Kadkhoda K. The role of antibody testing for SARS‐CoV‐2:
is there one? J Clin Microbiol. (2020).   COVID‐19  Clinical  and
Immune  Spectra  targets for immune responses to SARS‐CoV‐2. Cell
Host Microbe. (2020) Janice Oh HL, Ken‐En GS, Bertoletti  A,  Tan
YJ.  Understanding the T cell immune response in SARS coronavirus
infection. Emerg Microbes Infect.  Wang SF, Chen HK, Chen  M,  Li
YW,  Chen  JY,  Tsao HC, et al. Humanleukocyte antigen class I Cw
1502 and class II DR 0301 genotypes are  associated  with  resis‐
tance  to  severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) Xiong P, Zeng
X, Song SM, Jia WS, Zhong HM, Xiao LL, et al.  Lack  of  associa‐
tion  between  HLA‐A, ‐B and ‐DRB1 alleles and the development of
SARS: a cohort of 95 SARS‐recovered individuals in  a  population
of  Guangdong,  southern  China. Int J Immunogenet. (2008) Lin M,
Tseng KH, Trejaut AJ, Lee LH, Loo HJ, Chu CC, et al.  Association
of HLA class I with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
infection.  Ng MH, Cheng HS, Lau MK, Leung MG, Khoo SU,  Zee  CB,
et  al.   Immunogenetics in SARS: a case‐control study. Hong Kong
Med J.  Ng MH, Lau MK, Li L, Cheng HS, Chan YW, Hui  KP,  et  al.
Association of human‐leukocyte‐antigen class I (B 0703) and class
II (DRB1 0301) genotypes with susceptibility  and  resistance  to
the  development  of  severe acute respiratory syndrome. J Infect
Dis. (2004) Ding Y, Wang H, Shen H, Li Z, Geng J, Han H,  et  al.
The  clinical  pathology  of  severe  acute  respiratory syndrome
(SARS): a report from China. J Pathol.  Ng DL, Al FH, Keating KM,
Gerber  IS,  Jones LT, Metcalfe GM, et al. Clinicopathologic, im‐
munohistochemical, and ultrastructural findings of a  fatal  case
of  middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection in the
United Arab Emirates. Am J Pathol. (2016) Xu Z, Shi  L,  Wang  Y,
Zhang  J,  Huang  L,  Zhang  C,  et  al. Pathological findings of
COVID‐19 associated with  acute  respiratory  distress  syndrome.
Lancet  Mehta  P,  McAuley FD, Brown M, Sanchez E, Tattersall SR,
Manson JJ.  COVID‐19: consider cytokine storm syndromes  and  im‐
munosuppression.  Pedersen SF, Ho YC. SARS‐CoV‐2: a storm is rag‐
ing. J Clin Invest. (2020) Hirano T, Murakami M. COVID‐19: a  new
virus, but a familiar receptor and cytokine release syndrome. Im‐
munity. (2020) 52:731 Channappanavar R, Perlman S. Pathogenic hu‐
man  coronavirus  infections: causes and consequences of cytokine
storm and immunopathology. Semin Qin C, Zhou L, Hu  Z,  Zhang  S,
Yang  S, Tao Y. Dysregulation of immune response in patients with
COVID‐19 in Wuhan, China. Clin Infect Dis.  Lei L, Qian  H,  Zhou
X, Zhang X, Zhang D, Dai T, et al. The phenotypic changes of gd T
cells in COVID‐19 patients. medRxiv.  Zhou Y, Fu B, Zheng X, Wang
D, Zhao C, Qi Y, et al. Pathogenic T cells and inflammatory mono‐
cytes incite inflammatory storm in  severe  COVID‐19  Bordoni  V,
Sacchi  A,  Cimini  E, Notari S, Grassi G, Tartaglia E, et al. An
inflammatory profile correlates with decreased frequency of cyto‐
toxic cells of print].  Wan S, Yi Q, Fan S, Lv J, Zhang X, Guo L,
et al. Characteristics of lymphocyte subsets and cytokines in pe‐
ripheral blood of 123 hospitalized patients with 2019 novel coro‐
navirus pneumonia (NCP). medRxiv.  Liu T, Zhang J, Yang Y, Ma  H,
Li  Z,  Zhang  J, et al. The potential role of IL‐6 in monitoring
severe case of coronavirus disease 2019. medRxiv.  113. Xu X, Han
M,  Li  T, Sun W, Wang D, Fu B, et al. Effective treatment of se‐
vere COVID‐19 patients with tocilizumab. Proc Natl Acad Sci  USA.
(2020)  114. Thevarajan I, Nguyen OHT, Koutsakos M, Druce J, Caly
L, van de Sandt CE, et al. Breadth of concomitant immune respons‐
es  prior  to  patient  recovery:  a  case  report  of non‐severe
COVID‐19. Nat Med. (2020) 26:453 115. Ong EZ, Chan ZFY, Leong YW,
Lee  YMN, Kalimuddin S, Mohideen HMS, et al. A dynamic immune re‐
sponse shapes COVID‐19 progression. Cell Host 116. Shaw AC, Gold‐
stein  RD,  Montgomery  RR.  Age‐dependent  dysregulation of 117.
Nikolich‐Zugich J. Aging of the T cell compartment  in  mice  and
humans: from no naive expectations to foggy memories. Jf Immunol.
(2014) 193:2622 118. Goldberg EL, Dixit VD. Drivers of age‐relat‐
ed  inflammation and strategies for healthspan extension. Immuno‐
logical Rev. (2015) 265:63 119. Lasry  A,  Ben‐Neriah  Y.  Senes‐
cence‐associated  inflammatory  responses:  aging and cancer per‐
spectives. Trends Immunol. (2015) 120. Goronzy JJ,  Fang  F,  Ca‐
vanagh MM, Qi Q, Weyand CM. Naive T cell maintenance and function
in human aging. J Immunol. (2015) 194:4073 121. Canan CH, Gokhale
SN, Carruthers B, Lafuse PW, Schlesinger SL, Torrelles BJ, et al.
Characterization  of  lung  inflammation  and   its   impact   on
macrophage function in aging. J Leuk Biol. (2014) 96:473 122. Lin
L, Lu L, Cao W, Li T. Hypothesis for potential  pathogenesis  pa‐
tients  with  viral  pneumonia.  Emerg Microb Infect. (2020) 123.
Zhao J, Alshukairi NA, Baharoon AS, Ahmed AW, Bokhari  AA,  Nehdi
MA,  et al. Recovery from the Middle East respiratory syndrome is
associated with  antibody  and  T‐cell  responses.  Sci  Immunol.
(2017)  cases  and a better prognosis than adults. Acta Paediatr.
(2020) 109:1088 125. Brodin P. Why is COVID‐19 so mild  in  chil‐
dren?  Acta  Paediatr. (2020) 126. Thome JJ, Yudanin N, Ohmura Y,
Kubota M, Grinshpun B, Sathaliyawala T, et al. Spatial map of hu‐
man T cell compartmentalization and maintenance 127. Xiong Y, Liu
Y, Cao L, Wang D, Guo M, Jiang A, et al.  Transcriptomic  charac‐
teristics  of  bronchoalveolar  lavage fluid and peripheral blood
mononuclear cells in COVID‐19 patients.  Emerg  Microbes  Infect.
(2020)  128.  Liao  M, Liu Y, Yuan J, Wen Y, Xu G, Zhao J, et al.
The landscape of 129. Zhou Z, Ren L, Zhang L, Zhong  J,  Xiao  Y,
Jia  Z, et al. Heightened innate immune responses in the respira‐
tory tract of COVID‐19 patients.  130. Sanders  JM,  Monogue  LM,
Jodlowski ZT, Cutrell JB. Pharmacologic 131. Casadevall A, Pirof‐
ski LA. The convalescent sera option for containing 132. Chen  L,
Xiong J, Bao L, Shi Y. Convalescent plasma as a potential therapy
for COVID‐19. Lancet Infect Dis. (2020) COVID‐19 Clinical and Im‐
mune Spectra 138. Zhu FC, Li HY, Guan HX, Hou HL, Wang JW, Li XJ,
et al. Safety, tolerability, and immunogenicity of a  recombinant
adenovirus  type‐5  vectored  COVID19 vaccine: a dose‐escalation,
open‐label, non‐randomised, first‐in‐human 139. Green  DR.  SARS‐
CoV2 vaccines: slow is fast. Sci Adv. (2020) eabc7428.  133. Shen
C, Wang Z, Zhao F, Yang Y, Li J, Yuan J, et al.  Treatment  of  5
critically  Ill  patients with COVID‐19 with convalescent plasma.
JAMA. (2020) 323:1582 134. OBrien  TR,  Thomas  LD,  Jackson  SS,
Prokunina‐Olsson  L,  Donnelly  PR, Hartmann R. Weak induction of
interferon expression by SARSCoV‐2 supports  clinical  trials  of
interferon lambda to treat early of print].  135. Sallard E, Les‐
cure XF, Yazdanpanah Y, Mentre F, Peiffer‐Smadja N. Type 1 inter‐
ferons  as a potential treatment against COVID‐19. Antiviral Res.
(2020) 136. Patterson BK, Seethamraju  H,  Dhody  K,  Corley  JM,
Kazempour  K,  Lalezari PJ, et al. Disruption of the CCL5/RANTES‐
CCR5 pathway restores immune homeostasis and reduces plasma viral
load  in  critical  COVID‐19. medRxiv.  137. Amanat F, Krammer F.
SARS‐CoV‐2 vaccines: status report. Immunity.  potential conflict
of  interest.   is  cited,  in  accordance with accepted academic
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which
does not comply with these terms.












