Multimonth Dispensing of Antiretroviral Therapy Protects the Most
Vulnerable From 2 Pandemics at Once Ariana Moriah  Traub,a  Temi‐
tayo  Ifafore‐Calfee,b  Benjamin Ryan Phelpsb Key Messages Multi‐
month dispensing, which provides patients with several months  of
antiretroviral  therapy,  benefits HIV patients by decreasing the
number of required clinic visits, improving  retention,  and  im‐
proving  viral  suppression.  With the increased spread of severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2,  we  encourage  govern‐
ments, ministries of health, and health care facilities to imple‐
ment multimonth reduce clinic visits and  safeguard  both  health
care workers and patients from coronavirus disease ince the emer‐
gence of the severe  acute  respiratory  syndrome  coronavirus  2
(SARS‐CoV‐2)  in  December 2019, the virus has been identified in
more than 183 countries.1 Its rapid spread is  of  major  concern
for those living in low‐ and middle‐income countries and specifi‐
cally people living with HIV (PLHIV). With the dearth of  studies
on  HIV‐coronavirus  disease  2019 (COVID‐19) coinfections, coun‐
tries have no clear evidence on specific risks for PLHIV.2,3 How‐
ever,  as with other infectious diseases, it is expected that PL‐
HIV who are not virally suppressed and/or on antiretroviral ther‐
apy (ART) might be at an increased risk of COVID19 infection, se‐
vere disease, and poor health outcomes.2,3 Thus, every precaution
must be taken to avoid HIV‐COVID‐19 coinfection and keep the num‐
ber of COVID‐19 cases at a minimum in countries with high propor‐
tions  of  PLHIV.   To minimize the spread of COVID‐19, PLHIV are
encouraged to follow public health guidelines to limit  in‐person
interactions  and  general  mitigation recommendations, including
social distancing and good hand hygiene. Refilling lifesaving an‐
tiretroviral  drugs requires interpersonal interaction and brings
the potential of Sustaining  Technical  and  Analytic  Resources,
United States Agency for International Development (USAID), Wash‐
ington, DC, USA.  Office of HIV/AIDS, USAID, Washington, DC, USA.
Global  Health:  Science  and Practice 2020 | Volume 8 | Number 2
increasing the spread of SARS‐CoV‐2 and other transmissible  dis‐
eases. Thus, policy makersincluding the U.S. Presidents Emergency
Plan for AIDS Reliefare encouraging countries  to  provide  PLHIV
with  a  multimonth  supply of ART as a key strategy to safeguard
PLHIV and health care workers  involved  in  providing  HIV  ser‐
vices.4  MULTIMONTH  ART  DISPENSING  MITIGATES  RISK  OF HIV AND
COVID‐19 Multimonth dispensing (MMD) is an aspect of  differenti‐
ated  service  delivery that provides patients with either 3 or 6
months of medication and eliminates the need for  monthly  clinic
and/or  community facility visits. From the patients perspective,
MMD has already been shown to reduce the cost of  travel,  reduce
patient  burden,  and  MMD  improves adherence and viral suppres‐
sion.5,7 In the context of the COVID‐19 pandemic, this viral sup‐
pression  strengthens  the immune system and likely mitigates the
risk of severe COVID‐19.8 MMD, essential to caring for PLHIV,  is
arguably  even  more critical during the COVID‐19 pandemic.  Cur‐
rently, only 21 countries have formal  6‐month  dispensing  poli‐
cies.  Two  countries  allow clinicians to provide 6‐month supply
when they deem appropriate, and 8 countries have a  3‐month  dis‐
pensing  policy  in  place.  South  Africa,  the country with the
largest number of PLHIV, only has a 2‐month dispensing policy  in
place.   To  mitigate  the damage caused by SARS‐CoV‐2 while pro‐
tecting the health of PLHIV, we encourage  countries  to  rapidly
implement 3‐month if not 6‐month dispensing. As a key strategy to
safeguard patients and health care  workers  providing  HIV  ser‐
vices,  MMD  also  reduces clinic visits, improves viral suppres‐
sion, encourages social distancing,  and  potentially  saves  pa‐
tients from the dual threat of SARS‐CoV‐2 and HIV.  As SARS‐CoV‐2
spreads, patient caseloads are likely to increase across low‐ and
middle‐income  countries  will protect the time and health of ex‐
isting health care professionals and ready our health systems for
imminent  threats as well as any that may follow.  Multimonth An‐
tiretroviral Therapy Dispensing Protects Against 2  Pandemics  1.
Dong  E,  Du  H, Gardner L. An interactive web‐based dashboard to
track COVID‐19 in real time. Lancet Infect Dis.  2020.  CrossRef.
2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. What to Know About
3. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Interim interim‐
guidance‐/554/interim‐guidance‐for‐covid‐19‐andpersons‐with‐hiv.
Updated April 21, 2020. Accessed March  31,  4.  U.S.  Presidents
Emergency  Plan for AIDS Relief. PEPFARs HIV Response in the Con‐
text of Coronavirus  Disease  2019  (COVID‐19).   2020.  Accessed
April  9,  2020.  5. Faturiyele IO, Appolinare T, Ngorima‐Mabhena
N, et al.  trial protocol. BMC  Public  Health.  2018;18(1):1069.
CrossRef.   6. Babigumira JB, Castelnuevo B, Stergachis A, et al.
Cost effectiveness of a pharmacy‐only refill program in  a  large
urban  HIV/AIDS  clinic  in  Uganda.  PloS One. 2011;6(3):e18193.
CrossRef. Medline 7. Prust ML, Banda CK, Nyirenda R, et al.  Mul‐
ti‐month  prescriptions,  fasttrack  refills,  and  community ART
groups: results from a process evaluation in Malawi on using dif‐
ferentiated  models  of  care  to  achieve national HIV treatment
goals. J Int AIDS Soc. 2017;20(Suppl 4):21650.  CrossRef. Medline
8.  Deeks  SG,  Overbaugh J, Phillips A, Buchbinder S. HIV infec‐
tion. Nat Global Health: Science and Practice 2020 | Volume  8  |
Number 2













































