JOURNAL  OF  ADVANCED VETERINARY AND ANIMAL RESEARCH A periodical
of the Network for the Veterinarians of Bangladesh (BDvetNET) VOL
7,  NO.  2,  PAGES 260280 REVIEW ARTICLE Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID‐19) pandemic, lessons to be learned!  Md.  Saiful  Islam1,
Md.  Abdus  Sobur1,  Mily Akter1, K. H. M. Nazmul Hussain Nazir1,
Antonio Toniolo2, Md. Tanvir Rahman1 ARTICLE HISTORY  Coronavirus
Disease  2019  (COVID‐19) caused by severe acute respiratory syn‐
drome coronavirus 2 (SARS‐CoV‐2) has been reported as a worldwide
emergency.  Due  to  the  extensiveness of spread was by April 3,
2020. A total of 1,016,399 cases of COVID‐19 with  53,238  deaths
was reported from 204 countries and territories including two in‐
ternational conveyances over the world. After China, most of  the
new  cases  were  from  Europe,  particularly Italy acting as the
source of importation to many of the other countries  around  the
world. China has obtained success by ascribing control strategies
against COVID‐19. The implementation of Chinas strategy, as  well
as  the  development  of  a  vaccine, may control the pandemic of
COVID‐19. Further robust studies are required controlling of  the
COVID‐19  or  similar viral diseases that may come in the future.
Revised April 14, 2020 Under  the  Coronoviridae  family,  coron‐
avirus  possesses  enveloped,  single‐stranded  Gram‐positive RNA
genome which has been detected in avian hosts  and  mammals,  in‐
cluding bats, camels, civets, dog, and cats [13]. Among previous‐
ly known several coronaviruses, most are mild pathogenic  to  hu‐
mans  [1],  but  Severe  Acute  Respiratory  Syndrome Coronavirus
(SARS‐CoV) and the Middle East Respiratory  Syndrome  Coronavirus
(MERS‐CoV)  caused  severe  human  infection  [4].  In Guangdong,
Southern China, a betacoronavirus:  SARS‐CoV  arose  in  November
2002  [5]  and  caused  774 deaths in 37 countries with more than
8,000 human infections [6]; and MERS‐CoV first emerged  in  Saudi
Arabia  in  2012  [7]  with  2,494  human  cases constituting 858
deaths, besides, 38 deaths were recorded in South Korea through a
single  introduction  [8,9]. Several patients with pneumonia‐like
respiratory illness were recognized  in  late  December  2019  in
Wuhan, Hubei (a province of China) [4,6]. Epidemiologically, they
were connected with Hunnan Correspondence Md. Tanvir Rahman Novel
coronavirus;  China;  travel  history; pandemic; control strategy
distributed under the terms of the wet market where  multifarious
non‐aquatic  birds  and  rabbits  were sold [6]. Although doctors
couldnt trace the cause at the beginning, a novel human infecting
coronavirus  was  identified as the etiology in the first week of
January 2020 [4,1015] using next‐generation  sequencing  [10,16].
WHO  named  the  virus  provisionally  as  2019 novel coronavirus
(2019‐nCoV) [17], followed by renaming as severe acute respirato‐
ry  syndrome  coronavirus 2 (SARS‐CoV‐2) based on the rule of in‐
ternational committee on taxonomy of viruses (ICTV) [18,19].  Be‐
fore that, the virus was recognized as a sister to SARS‐CoV [19].
The name SARS‐CoV‐2 was approved by ICTV based on  the  similari‐
ties  of  genetic  characteristics  with the previous coronavirus
that caused the outbreak of SARS, 2003 [18].  Finally,  based  on
severity,  spread,  transmissibility,  prevention, and treatment,
WHO named the disease as Coronavirus Disease  2019  (COVID19)  in
the international classification of diseases [15,18].  Due to the
importation of COVID‐19 from epidemic  states  and  countries  to
different  states  and  countries, the disease How to cite: Islam
MS, Sobur MA, Akter M, Nazir KHMNH, Toniolo A, Rahman MT.  Coron‐
avirus disease 2019 (COVID‐19) pandemic, lessons to be learned! J
Adv Vet Anim Res 2020; 7(2):260280.
 Islam et al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 260280,  June  2020
has  spread  throughout  China  and all over the world in a short
time, though the outbreak was recognized in Wuhan [1926]. Because
of fast‐spreading, COVID‐19 has affected 204 countries and terri‐
tories including two international conveyances [27]. WHO declared
the  COVID‐19 disease as a global pandemic by observing the enor‐
mous number of cases and colossal deaths with the concatenate  of
social  operations  and huge economic losses throughout the world
[27,28]. Furthermore, WHO also declared that  Europe  has  become
the new epicenter of COVID‐19 on March 13, 2020, due to the dead‐
ly run throughout the European  countries  [29].  An  implausible
number  of deaths has made the coronavirus pandemic as death toll
over the world.  Human‐to‐human transmission among a  cluster  of
people including doctors and healthcare workers is augmenting the
piquancy  of  COVID‐19  with  the  mild‐to‐severe   sign‐symptoms
[14,23].  Although the extensiveness of spread and death rate has
differed among SARS, MERS, and COVID‐19 outbreak,  the  sign  and
symptoms  with  transmission  patterns  are similar [30]. Several
studies found the similarities in  the  transmission  pattern  by
droplet  and contact (direct and indirect) transmission among the
SARS‐like viruses [3133]. The transmission of  viruses  is  under
the influence of many factors, such as environmental temperature,
humidity, and population density [11,12].  However, no  effective
medications  and vaccines are developed against SARS‐CoV‐2 though
different research groups over the world are  trying  to  develop
vaccines  and  antiviral  drugs [34]. Thereafter, every nation is
providing their best endeavors to alleviate the extensiveness  of
COVID‐19.   As a strategy to prevent and control the intensifica‐
tion of COVID‐19, China started  to  take  an  extreme  level  of
strategies such as extreme lockdown, transmission route blocking,
and susceptible population protection, followed by other  nations
are  trying  to  follow  Chinas strategies prevention and control
strategies.  Selection criteria COVID‐19 virus  with  their  epi‐
demiology,  transmission  dynamics,  and current situation of the
outbreak, and prevention and control measures. We also  extracted
the  information from relevant websites for current situation re‐
ports of the outbreak. No language limit was for information  ac‐
quisition.  There  was  a  strong  focus  on the most Information
sources and search strategy Google Scholar, Research Gate, Web of
Sciences,  Elsevier,  Nature,  WHO, and Worldometer. The keywords
used here were: COVID‐19, SARS,  MERS,  SARS‐CoV‐2,  Coronavirus,
2019  nCoV,  Pandemic, Wuhan coronavirus, First New Case, Preven‐
tion, Control, and Chinas Control  Strategies  or  a  combination
among these.  The searches were between March 29, 2020, and April
3, 2020, by individual researchers, and then  all  the  collected
data were coordinated.  Data incorporation abstract in context to
the interest of the study. To find out the  current  scenario  of
COVID‐19  outbreak, prevention, and control strategies across the
globe, the total number of confirmed cases, death cases, and  re‐
covery cases [27,37] the first imported case in countries, impor‐
tation sources There were so many lessons for  China  during  and
after  the  SARS  outbreak in the Southern part of the country in
2002.  As a part of continuous research, in March 2019,  research
studies  from China warned about the possible future SARSor MERS‐
like outbreak in China from  bat  [38].  Wild  animals  including
bats,  snakes, and others were sold in a seafood market at Huanan
in Wuhan, primarily was declared as the source of  infection  but
environmental specimens from the market were found to carry SARS‐
CoV‐2 [39]. But the animal association is not confirmed yet. Ini‐
tially,  snake  was  thought  to be a potential reservoir but re‐
searchers rejected the option [40]. The whole‐genome sequence  of
SARS‐CoV‐2  and other available Betacorona virus revealed a close
relation with BatCov RaTG13 with 96% similarity [11,4144]. In the
beginning,  confirmed  patients  had  a history of working in the
market [45]. Human‐to‐human  transmission  through  droplets  and
fomites  was  noticed in many patients having no association with
the market. Besides, the infection to healthcare workers strongly
indicated  the  high human‐to‐human transmission through droplets
and fomites and direct contact [4648].  The  other  provinces  of
China  were  infected through the importation of cases from Hubei
province. Initially, some countries reported imported cases, lat‐
er  on,  local transmission. Finally, importation among the coun‐
tries and to new countries continued sharply, leads the  outbreak
towards  pandemic.  From the outset, newly infected countries re‐
ported their first case was  imported  from  China  as  expected,
thereafter,  2).  Besides,  the  neighboring country was also the
source Europe has been declared as the epicenter of the pandemic
 Islam et al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 260280,  June  2020
Current  case reports A total of 1,016,399 cases of COVID‐19 with
213,133 (80%) recovered and 53,238 (20%) deaths have been report‐
ed from 204 countries and territories along with two internation‐
al conveyances all over the world by April 3, 2020 245,373 number
of  cases,  whereas  Italy  (115,242),  Spain  (112,065), Germany
(84,794), China (81,620), France (France), Iran (50,468), and  UK
(33,718)  were mostly affected [37]. The active cases are 750,028
where 712,373 (95%) were mild and 37,655  (5%)  were  serious  or
critical  cases. The critical cases were mostly in France (6,399)
followed by Spain  (6,092),  USA  (5,421),  Italy  (4,053),  Iran
(3,956),  and  Germany (3,936). Although critical cases were high
in China, the numbers are now decreasing in  the  prospected  way
but  increasing  outside  China particularly, in the USA and most
European countries [37]. The numbers of  new  cases  were  always
more than the recovery number. Since China has managed to prevent
the spread of the virus and was discharging a large number of re‐
coveries  every day, the daily recovery number increased over the
new cases. However, the number of confirmed cases  is  augmenting
day by day. This is due to the huge number of new patients in the
USA, European countries, Iran [37]. Overall, the number  of  con‐
firmed cases was reported more in Fig. 2) [50].  Viability, incu‐
bation period, and symptoms Although viruses need a  living  host
to  survive  and replicate, SARS‐CoV‐2 remains viable outside the
living body and persist on different environmental conditions for
viable  on stainless steel and plastic compared to aerosols, cop‐
per, and cardboard [51]. Thats why  the  way  of  transportation,
food  products,  food  containers, house doors, elevator buttons,
cellphone screens, glass windows, Viability time Median half‐life
Up  to 34 h Up to 72 h Stainless steel Up to 72 h Up to 4 h Up to
24 h Up to 96 h hospital beds, etc.can act as the source of indi‐
rect  contact transmission of SARS‐CoV‐2 [52].  Although COVID‐19
produces signs and symptoms in the  infected  individuals  within
114  days,  the  average  period  is 56 days. Within this average
time, fever and mild respiratory symptoms may be developed in af‐
fected individuals [43].  The WHO‐China Joint Mission has report‐
ed on signs and symptoms of COVID‐19 and they revealed  that  the
disease  can  cause non‐specific symptoms, including asymptomatic
to severe pneumonia, followed by death [53].  The  joint  mission
indicated that the signs and symptoms can vary according to their
laboratory findings collected from 55,924 confirmed cases  by  20
February  2020 [53]. The signs and symptoms with their occurrence
are shown in Among total cases, the  mortality  of  COVID‐19  was
5.2%  (total  death/ total confirmed cases) quite lower than SARS
(9.6%) and far away from MERS (34%) and Ebola (65.7%) [30,37,54].
The  highest  deaths  were  in  Italy  (13,915) followed by Spain
(10,348),  USA  (6,095),  France  (5,387),  China  (3,322),  Iran
(3,160)  and  UK  (2,921)  4)  [37,55]. There are fluctuations of
death based on age, country, and date. In context  to  sex,  male
death  (2.8%)  was  higher than female (1.7%) among all cases and
males were infected more than female [56]. The  SARS  study  also
revealed  similar  findings  in relation to sex [57]. This may be
due to the presence of gene for angiotensin I converting enzyme‐2
(ACE‐2)  receptor  and  the host receptor for SARS found on the X
chromosome and more tendency of males to smoke which  results  in
lung  damage  [5860]. Patients suffering from cardiovascular dis‐
ease, diabetes, chronic respiratory disease, hypertension, cancer
and  elderly immunosuppressed people [61], are the most suscepti‐
ble 0.9% of death was not associated with any pre‐existing  medi‐
cal  conditions [56].  Is there any effect of temperature and hu‐
midity on COVID‐19 transmission?  There is speculation that  cli‐
matic  factors,  such  as temperature and humidity can affect the
transmission of SARS‐like viruses. Recent several  studies  indi‐
cated the effectiveness of temperature and humidity on SARS‐CoV‐2
though the data were collected during the pre‐stage outbreak  [62
64]. In the progression of pandemic, the outbreak is occurring in
a few countries having high temperature, such as India, Malaysia,
and Brazil, etc. On the other hand, some
 Islam  et  al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 260280, June 2020
WHO [53]).  from Worldometer [56]).  Death rate(confirmed  cases)
Death  rate(all cases) No fatalities countries, such as Japan and
South Korea having low temperatures  showed  a  limited  outbreak
[37].  These exceptions interpret that the virus transmission may
depend on the taken interventions by  governments.  Besides,  the
transmission  can  be influenced by population density, awareness
of people, economic strength, and health  system  of  a  country.
Therefore,  we  cant directly relate the influence of temperature
on the transmission of SARSCoV‐2. Robust studies should be  taken
to  clarify  this  vague Prevention and control To limit the loss
associated with COVID‐19 and stop its spread,  immediate  control
measures  are crucial [65].  Travel history is very important for
the early detection of SARS‐CoV‐2 to prevent the local  transmis‐
sion  [66]. In the present situation, travelers from the infected
areas are the main route of virus entry to  a  new  country.  WHO
stated  several recommendations for travelers particularly inter‐
national passengers in relation to the current outbreak [67]. WHO
suggests  only  temperature screening at entry or exit, is always
not enough to prevent international spread, since infected people
may  be in the early stage of the disease (incubation period) and
may not show apparent symptoms, or may use antipyretics  to  dis‐
simulate fever. In the current situation, it is better to collect
contact details of passengers, detailed information where to move
for  contact  tracing and provide a health card with details best
to quarantine individuals who came from the affected areas. Indi‐
vidual  country  can  discourage their people to travel to an af‐
fected area if not emergency [67]. Many of the countries have al‐
ready  restricted  the  entry  of  flights from COVID‐19 affected
countries and issuing an on‐arrival visa. Force institutional and
home quarantine is also and collages are now closed in many parts
of the world to combat COVID‐19. To control the  local  transmis‐
sion,  reducing  human‐to‐human transmission through droplets and
contact is crucial. WHO recommendations on virus  control  inter‐
ventions  to  lower the general risks of spread includes avoiding
close contact with confirmed or suspected patients or a  traveler
from  the  infected  area; hand hygiene through the frequent wash
with sanitizer
 Islam et al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 260280,  June  2020
particularly  after  exposure  with affected people or with their
environment. Besides, affected people should use  protective  de‐
vices during coughing, keep up a distance, and follow the nations
health tips. Following other updates and recommendations  of  WHO
is important.  Previous knowledge of MERS and SARS control is al‐
so useful [67], since COVID‐19 is a member of the same  group  of
viruses.  Although knowledge dissemination is needed, the govern‐
ment should be careful about the misinformation and clarify them.
Finally, the sharing of authentic knowledge and technologies, and
health care facilities  among  the  countries  will  be  helpful.
Coronavirus  changes  its  immunogenic  structures  frequently as
COVID‐19 has emerged after changing its antigenic structures sev‐
eral  times.  Thus, targeting a protein COVID‐19. Recently, Ahmed
et al. [68] identified a set of B cell and T cell epitopes in the
spike  (S)  and  nucleocapsid (N) proteins that potentially offer
protection against this novel virus. Interestingly, there was  no
mutation  found  in  these epitopes considering the 120 available
SARS‐CoV‐2  sequences  [68].   China  strategy  China  aimed   at
COVID‐19  control  as  the  priority at all levels of government.
China already has proved that COVID19 is  controllable  and  they
reported  only 31 cases on April 3, 2020. To control the disease,
China undertook three phases that could be adopted by other coun‐
tries currently having COVID‐19 outbreaks (Fig. 2) [53]. Here, we
focused on China strategy because it was the  country  where  the
first  epidemic  started. It was also the the first success story
too.  Moreover, compare to other countries, much more people were
affected  in  China. Basic approaches in Korea, Japan, and Norway
who also controlled COVID‐19 epidemic later were quite similar to
China  primarily  focusing  on  test,  isolation, and quarantine.
First phase The first phase focused  on  the  prevention  of  the
spread  of  the virus from the epicenter Wuhan and other infected
areas of Hubei to other provinces, therefore,  aimed  to  control
the  infection  source,  stop  transmission,  and prevent further
spread. Multi‐sectoral approaches were taken for  the  prevention
and  control  of  the  disease.  Wet  markets were identified and
closed and necessary steps were taken to  identify  the  zoonotic
connection;  strict  supervision,  and control measures were also
made for live poultry and wildlife  markets.  They  informed  WHO
about  the epidemic on January 3, 2020, and also shared the whole
genome sequence of SARS‐CoV‐2 on January 10, 2020.  Besides, they
established  diagnostic  and therapy, surveillance, management of
exposure and laboratory detection protocols for COVID‐19 and  de‐
veloped diagnostic kits for the test.
 Islam  et  al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 260280, June 2020
Second phase The second phase aimed to reduce the number  of  new
cases  as  well  as to treat patients, reduce deaths, and prevent
explorations in Wuhan and nearby priority areas  in  Hubei  prov‐
ince. The main focus of the other provinces was to prevent impor‐
tations, curb the spread, and implement the  joint  control  mea‐
sures.  The  Chinese  government  categorized the COVID‐19 as two
types: Class B infectious disease and  border  health  quarantine
infectious  disease  based on the notifiable reporton January 20,
2020. They attributed strong transportation law  to  prevent  the
transmission  of  disease by checking body temperature, declaring
health care approbation, and practicing quarantine at the  trans‐
portation  depots.   Moreover, on 23 January 2020, the Wuhan gov‐
ernment  implemented  strict  traffic  restrictions.   With   the
progress of the disease, diagnostic, treatment, and other associ‐
ated protocols were improved; isolation of case and treatment  of
patients  were  strengthened. The public movement was restricted.
Medical knowledge dissemination was strengthened  and  prevention
and  control measures were regularly released. New hospitals were
built, medical supplies were coordinated and the best use of  all
other  resources  was  done.  The supply of daily needs and their
prices were strictly monitored to make sure smooth  daily  opera‐
tion  of  society.   Third phase This stage focused to reduce the
clusters of cases, introducing a scientific evidence‐based policy
for  prevention  and  control. Patients in Wuhan and other poten‐
tially risky areas of Hubei province, patients were treated care‐
fully  to  reduce virus transmission. A differentiated prevention
and control measures were adopted for different  regions  of  the
country  and  provinces  based on the level of risk they were ex‐
posed. Sophisticated hitch technologies, such as Big‐data and ar‐
tificial intelligence were used for strengthening contact tracing
along with the management of priority populations. Health  insur‐
ance  payment,  off‐site  settlement,  and financial compensation
were promulgated as a part of the better health  management  sys‐
tem.  Other  provinces  supported in all ways to curb quickly the
spread of the disease. Steps were being taken to re‐establish the
normal social activities in a stepwise fashion along with improv‐
ing public awareness on disease prevention and control, and  pub‐
lic health. Besides, research and development activities focusing
on development of diagnostics, therapeutics,  and  vaccines  were
Why European countries including the USA failed to control A col‐
lective failure in taking swift measures in time and being uncon‐
cerned leads to enormous and unnecessary deaths to the public due
to the coronavirus  disease.   Among  European  countries,  Italy
first  faced the serious and disastrous outbreak of COVID‐19. For
the severity of the disease, lacking concern along with having  a
huge aged population are considered as foremost causes.  The gov‐
ernment failed to enforce full lockdown  in  time.   Furthermore,
the  decision  to lockdown northern Italy was leaked before being
approved and the people started to escape from  North  to  South.
This  may  have  caused  the  rapid spread of the virus. Besides,
failure to rule proper social distance also made a  big  role  in
the  spread  of  COVID‐19.  They failed to track contact tracing,
comprehensive testing, and self‐isolation.  Like Italy,  most  of
the  European  countries  also  couldnt  control  the severity of
COVID‐19 because of waiting for long to enforce the lockdown  and
failure  to  maintain  social distance. Even the USA is being ex‐
ploded by COVID‐19 due to  the  failure  in  pursuing  widespread
testing,  maintaining  contact  tracing,  and ascribing mandatory
quarantine for risk individuals. Almost all countries, around the
world  where the COVID‐19 is highly prevalent, faced the severity
due to the lack of concern  and  failure  of  maintaining  social
Knowledge gap There is evidence of SARS‐CoV‐2 presence in patient
stools [25]. However, fecal‐oral route transmission is still  un‐
clear.  Previous reports revealed the capability of SARS and oth‐
er coronaviruses of surviving on an inanimate object and environ‐
mental  surfaces  [69,70].  However,  there is no report of SARS‐
CoV‐2 presence in the environment except Hunan Market. The effec‐
tiveness  of  travel  restriction,  maintaining  social distance,
wearing a mask in the general public, home, or self‐quarantine is
not  clear.  Although  there are some studies on the treatment of
COVID‐19, more study needed [25,71,72]. Several studies  are  fo‐
cusing on the influence of environmental parameters, such as tem‐
perature and humidity, on SARS‐like virus  transmission  [69,73].
The  seasonality  of the outbreak is also required to study. More
studies are needed to explore the  role  of  environment  in  the
spread of the virus and its viability that are crucial for adopt‐
ing strategies to control COVID‐19 outbreaks. Besides  the  envi‐
ronment,  more  studies are required to identify the intermediate
host(s) of COVID‐19, because bats are known to be a reservoir  of
SARS‐CoV‐2 [38].
 Islam  et  al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 260280, June 2020
Failed to Deciding in time; Widespread testing; Contact  tracing;
Attribute  mandatory  quarantine.   Failed to Enforce lockdown in
time; Maintainsocial distancing.  Political issue Fail to Enforce
lockdown  in time; Maintain social distancing.  Having a huge old
population Lack of concern Playing  football  matches  with  huge
supporters  during the COVID‐19 outbreak.  Failed to Maintain so‐
cial distancing; Enforce lockdown in time; Take effective quaran‐
tine  measures.   Limitation  in The capacity of test centers and
existing  diagnostic  laboratories  interms  of   personnel   and
reagents;  Maintaining  social distancing.  Failed to Take effec‐
tive quarantine measures; Disinfect the cities.  Political issues
Failed  to  Maintain  social  distancing;  Track contact tracing.
Failed to track the contact tracing  Lack  of  seriousness  among
people  of  government.   Failed to implement restrictions timely
Tried to adopt an intelligent lockdown but failed.  COVID‐19 out‐
break in China has been declared as pandemic due to its rapid and
extensive spread in at least 204 countries and territories. After
China,  Europe is the new epicenter of the outbreak. The importa‐
tion of infected individuals to uninfected countries was the main
cause  of the current pandemic and most of them occurred from Eu‐
rope, especially Italy. More than 1 million people have been  af‐
fected bythe COVID‐19 virus with more than 50,000 mortality until
today. The number of new cases and death are increasing every day
sharply.  Earlier  study and current data suggest that the trans‐
mission of SARS‐CoV‐2 can be influenced by some metrological  pa‐
rameters,  population  density, droplet, and direct‐indirect con‐
tact; however, further study should be undertaken. In context  to
control the current outbreak, Chinas strategy is a role model for
the world. Besides, an effective vaccine will be a permanent  so‐
lution  along with the development of SARS‐CoV‐2 specific antivi‐
ral therapy.  Rahman, Adhunik Sadar Hospital, Naogaon, Bangladesh
Conflict  of  interest MTR and MAS designed the study. MSI and MA
collected data. MSI and MAS analyzed and interpreted the data.
 Islam et al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 260280,  June  2020
Su  S, Wong G, Shi W, Liu J, Lai AC, Zhou J, et al. Epidemiology,
genetic recombination, and pathogenesis of coronaviruses.  Trends
Cavanagh  D.  Coronavirus  avian infectious bronchitis virus. Vet
Res Ismail MM, Tang Y, Saif YM. Pathogenicity  of  turkey  coron‐
avirus  in  Chen  L, Liu W, Zhang Q, Xu K, Ye G, Wu W, et al. RNA
based mNGS approach identifies a novel human coronavirus from two
individual pneumonia cases in 2019 Wuhan outbreak. Emerg Microbes
Peiris JS, Guan Y, Yuen KY. Severe  acute  respiratory  syndrome.
Nat Lu R, Zhao X, Li J, Niu P, Yang B, Wu H, et al. Genomic char‐
acterisation and epidemiology of 2019 novel coronavirus: implica‐
tions  for  virus  origins  and  receptor  binding.  Lancet 2020;
395(10224):565 Zaki AM, Van Boheemen S, Bestebroer TM,  Osterhaus
AD, Fouchier RA. Isolation of a novel coronavirus from a man with
pneumonia Lee J, Chowell G, Jung E. A dynamic compartmental model
for  of  Korea: a retrospective analysis on control interventions
and Lee JY, Kim YJ, Chung EH, Kim DW, Jeong I, Kim Y, et al.  The
clinical  and  virological  features  of  the first imported case
causing MERS‐CoV outbreak in South Korea, 2015.  BMC  Infect  Dis
2017; Zhu N, Zhang D, Wang W, Li X, Yang B, Song J, et al. A nov‐
el coronavirus from patients with pneumonia in China,  2019.  New
Engl  J  Med Zhou P, Yang XL, Wang XG, Hu B, Zhang L, Zhang W, et
al. A pneumonia outbreak associated with  a  new  coronavirus  of
probable  Wu  F, Zhao S, Yu B, Chen YM, Wang W, Song ZG, et al. A
new coronavirus associated with human respiratory disease in Chi‐
na.  Nature Ren LL, Wang YM, Wu ZQ, Xiang ZC, Guo L, Xu T, et al.
Identification of a novel coronavirus causing severe pneumonia in
human:  a Chan JF, Yuan S, Kok KH, To KK, Chu H, Yang J, et al. A
familial Tan W, Zhao X, Ma X, Wang W, Niu P, Xu W, et al. A novel
coronavirus  genome  identified  in  a  cluster of pneumonia cas‐
esWuhan, China 20192020. China CDC Weekly. N  Engl  J  Med  2020;
2(4):612.   Wu  A, Peng Y, Huang B, Ding X, Wang X, Niu P, et al.
Genome  composition  and  divergence  of  the  novel  coronavirus
(2019‐nCoV)  WHO.  Naming  the coronavirus disease (COVID‐19) and
the virus diseases/novel‐coronavirus‐2019/technical‐guidance/nam‐
ingthe‐coronavirus‐disease‐(covid‐2019)‐and‐the‐virus‐that‐caus‐
es‐it (Accessed 3 April 2020).  Gorbalenya AE,  Baker  SC,  Baric
RS,  de  Groot RJ, Drosten C, Gulyaev Lu H, Stratton CW, Tang YW.
Outbreak of pneumonia of unknown etiology in Wuhan China: themys‐
tery and the miracle. J Med Virol Arab‐Mazar Z, Sah R, Rabaan AA,
Dhama K, Rodriguez‐Morales  AJ.  Mapping  the  incidence  of  the
COVID‐19  hotspot in Iran Implications for Travellers. Travel Med
Infect Di 2020; 101630.  Chen N, Zhou M, Dong X, Qu  J,  Gong  F,
Han  Y, et al. Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 99
cases of 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a  de‐
scriptive  study. Lancet 2020; Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, Zhao
J, Hu Y, et al. Clinical features of patients infected with  2019
novel  coronavirus  in  Wuhan, Holshue ML, DeBolt C, Lindquist S,
Lofy KH, Wiesman J, Bruce H, et al.  First  case  of  2019  novel
coronavirus in the United States.  Wang D, Hu B, Hu C, Zhu F, Liu
X, Zhang J, et al. Clinical characteristics of  138  hospitalized
patients  with 2019 novel coronavirusinfected pneumonia in Wuhan,
China. JAMA 2020; WHO. Coronavirus disease (COVID‐2019) situation
reports:                default‐source/coronaviruse/situation‐re‐
ports/20200402‐sitrep‐73‐covid‐19.pdf?sfvrsn=5ae25bc7_4 (Accessed
3  April,  WHO. Coronavirus disease (COVID‐2019) press briefings:
WHO Emergencies Press Conference on coronavirus disease  outbreak
diseases/novel‐coronavirus‐2019/media‐resources/press‐briefings
(Accessed 3 April 2020).  WHO. WHO Director‐Generals opening  re‐
marks at the media Wang Y, Wang Y, Chen Y, Qin Q. Unique epidemi‐
ological and clinical features of the emerging 2019 novel  coron‐
avirus  pneumonia (COVID19) implicate special control measures. J
Med Virol 2020; Peng X, Xu X, Li Y,  Cheng  L,  Zhou  X,  Ren  B.
Transmission routes of 2019‐nCoV and controls in dental practice.
Int J Oral Sci 2020; Rodrguez‐Morales AJ, MacGregor K,  Kanagara‐
jah  S, Patel D, To KK, Tsang OT, Chik‐Yan Yip C, Chan KH, Wu TC,
Chan JMC, et al. Consistent detection of 2019  novel  coronavirus
in saliva. Clin
 Islam  et  al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 260280, June 2020
Cyranoski D. What Chinas coronavirus response can teach the  Shen
K,  Yang  Y,  Wang  T,  Zhao D, Jiang Y, Jin R, et al. Diagnosis,
treatment, and prevention of 2019 novel coronavirus infection  in
children:  experts consensus statement. World J Pediatr 2020; 19;
Worldometer. COVID‐19 coronavirus outbreak. Available via Fan  Y,
Zhao  K,  Shi  ZL,  Zhou  P.  Bat coronaviruses in China. Viruses
Gralinski LE, Menachery VD. Return of the coronavirus: 2019‐nCoV.
Ji W, Wang W, Zhao X, Zai J, Li X. Homologous recombination with‐
in the spike glycoprotein of the newly identified coronavirus may
boost cross‐species transmission from snake to human. J Med Virol
Paraskevis D, Kostaki EG,  Magiorkinis  G,  Panayiotakopoulos  G,
Sourvinos G, Tsiodras S. Full‐genome evolutionary analysis of the
novel coronavirus (2019‐nCoV) rejects the hypothesis of emergence
as  a  result  of  a  recent recombination event.  Zhang T, Wu Q,
Zhang Z. Probable pangolin origin of  SARSCoV‐2  associated  with
the  COVID‐19 outbreak. Curr Biol 2020; Zheng J. SARS‐CoV‐2: ane‐
merging coronavirus that causes a Ye ZW, Yuan S,  Yuen  KS,  Fung
SY, Chan CP, Jin DY. Zoonotic origins of human coronaviruses. Int
J BiolSci 2020; 16(10):168697; Lu R, Zhao X, Li J, Niu P, Yang B,
Wu  H,  et  al. Genomic characterisation and epidemiology of 2019
novel coronavirus: implications for virus  origins  and  receptor
binding.  Lancet 2020; 395(10224):565 Riou J, Althaus CL. Pattern
of early human‐to‐human transmission of Wuhan 2019  novel  coron‐
avirus  (2019‐nCoV), December 2019 Chen T, Rui J, Wang Q, Zhao Z,
Cui JA, Yin L. A mathematical model for simulating the  transmis‐
sion  of Wuhan novel Coronavirus.  Huang Y, Tu M, Wang S, Chen S,
Zhou W, Chen D, et al.  Clinical  characteristics  of  laboratory
confirmed positive cases of SARS‐CoV‐2 infection in Wuhan, China:
a retrospective single center analysis.  European Centre for Dis‐
ease  Prevention  and  Control.  Situation geographical‐distribu‐
tion‐2019‐ncov‐cases (Accessed 14 March Van Doremalen N, Bushmak‐
er  T,  Morris  DH,  Holbrook MG, Gamble A, Williamson BN, et al.
Aerosol and surface stability of SARS‐CoV‐2 news/2020/03/13/what‐
coronavirus‐does‐body‐covid‐19‐infection‐process‐symp‐
toms/5009057002/ (Accessed 3 April 2020).   default‐source/coron‐
aviruse/who‐china‐joint‐mission‐on‐covid19‐final‐report.pdf  (Ac‐
cessed 3 April 2020).   who.int/health‐topics/ebola‐virus‐disease
(Accessed 3 April KFF‐ Global Health Policy. COVID‐19 coronavirus
tracker. Available Worldometer. Age, sex, existing conditions  of
COVID‐19  cases  and  Karlberg J, Chong DS, Lai WY. Do men have a
higher case fatality rate of severe  acute  respiratory  syndrome
than women do? Am J Chan JF, Kok KH, Zhu Z, Chu H, To KK, Yuan S,
et al. Genomic characterization of the 2019 novel human‐pathogen‐
ic  coronavirus  isolated  from a patient with atypical pneumonia
after visiting Wuhan.  Zhao Y, Zhao Z, Wang Y, Zhou Y, Ma Y,  Zuo
W. Single‐cell RNA expression profiling of ACE2, the putative re‐
ceptor of Wuhan 2019‐nCov.  Cao Y, Li L, Feng Z, Wan S, Huang  P,
Sun  X,  et  al. Comparative genetic analysis of the novel coron‐
avirus (2019‐nCoV/SARS‐CoV‐2) receptor ACE2 in different  popula‐
tions.  Cell  Discov  2020;  6(1):14;  WHO.  Coronavirus  disease
(COVID‐2019) situation reports: Wang J, Tang K,  Feng  K,  Lv  W.
High  temperature  and  high  humidity reduce the transmission of
COVID‐19. Available via SSRN 3551767.  Ma Y, Zhao Y, Liu J, He X,
Wang B, Fu S, et al. Effects of temperature variation and humidi‐
ty on the mortality of COVID‐19 in Wuhan.  Zhu Y, Xie J. Associa‐
tion  between  ambient  temperature  and COVID19 infection in 122
cities from China. Sci Total Environ 2020; Song F, Shi N, Shan F,
Zhang  Z,  Shen  J,  Lu H, et al. Emerging 2019 Novel Coronavirus
(2019‐nCoV) Pneumonia. Radiology 2020; Kim JY, Choe PG, Oh Y,  Oh
KJ,  Kim  J,  Park SJ, et al. The first case of 2019 novel coron‐
avirus pneumonia imported into Korea from Ahmed SF,  Quadeer  AA,
McKay MR. Preliminary identification of potential vaccine targets
for the COVID‐19 coronavirus (SARSCoV‐2) based  on  SARS‐CoV  im‐
munological  studies.  Viruses  2020; Casanova LM, Jeon S, Rutala
WA, Weber DJ, Sobsey MD. Effects of air temperature and  relative
humidity on coronavirus survival
 Islam  et  al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 260280, June 2020
Liu W, Morse JS, Lalonde T, Xu S. Learning from the past:  possi‐
ble urgent prevention and treatment options for severe acute res‐
piratory infections caused by 2019nCoV. Chembiochem 2020; Lai CC,
Shih  TP, Ko WC, Tang HJ, Hsueh PR. Severe acute respiratory syn‐
drome coronavirus 2  (SARS‐CoV‐2)  and  coronavirus  disease‐2019
(COVID‐19):  the  epidemic  and  the  challenges.  Int J Chan KH,
Peiris JS, Lam SY, Poon LL, Yuen KY, Seto WH. The effects of tem‐
perature and relative humidity on the viability of Project Syndi‐
cate. Why America Is Losing to  COVID‐19.  Available  Politics  &
Policy.  The  lessons from Italys Covid‐19 mistakes.  The NewYork
Time. Europe struggles to combat coronavirus as Salath M, Althaus
CL,  Neher R, Stringhini S, Hodcroft E, Fellay J, et al. COVID‐19
epidemic in Switzerland: on the importance  of  testing,  contact
tracing  and  isolation.  Swiss Med Wkly 2020; 150:1112; AA. Iran
fails to take timely measures for COVID‐19:  Expert.   ALJAZEERA.
COVID‐19:     Irans    government    didnt    botch    the    up‐
front/2020/04/covid‐19‐iran‐government‐didn‐botch‐re‐
sponse‐200403075538214.html (Accessed 3 April 2020).  Al‐monitor.
Turkey  and  COVID‐19:   Is   another   Italy   in   the   origi‐
nals/2020/03/turkey‐might‐be‐another‐italy‐in‐the‐making‐coron‐
avirus.html (Accessed 3 April 2020).  BBC. Coronavirus: Why Dutch
lockdown may be a high‐risk
 Islam  et  al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 260280, June 2020
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL Reporting Country/  Territory*/Area  Total
confirmed  cases Total deaths Total recovery New Zealand Viet Nam
Brunei Darussalam Papua New Guinea French Polynesia* New  Caledo‐
nia*  Northern  Mariana  Islands*(Commonwealth of the) The United
Kingdom Russian Federation Western Pacific Region European Region
 Islam et al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 260280,  June  2020
Reporting  Country/  Territory*/Area  Total confirmed cases Total
deaths Bosnia and Herzegovina North Macedonia San Marino Holy See
Total recovery Faroe Islands* Isle of Man* South‐East Asia Region
 Islam  et  al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 260280, June 2020
Reporting Country/ Territory*/Area Total  confirmed  cases  Total
deaths Total recovery Sri Lanka Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates
Eastern Mediterranean Region Costa Rica Occupied Palestinian ter‐
ritory* Region of the Americas United States of America
 Islam  et  al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 260280, June 2020
Reporting Country/ Territory*/Area Total  confirmed  cases  Total
deaths  Bolivia  (Plurinational  State of) Trinidad and Tobago El
Salvador Saint Lucia Saint Kitts and Nevis  Antigua  and  Barbuda
Saint  Vincent  and  the  Grenadines  Total  recovery Puerto Rico
French Guiana United States Virgin Islands  Sint  Maarten  Cayman
Islands  Saint  Barthlemy  Saint  Martin Turks and Caicos Islands
British Virgin Islands African Region South Africa  Burkina  Faso
Cte dIvoire
 Islam  et  al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 260280, June 2020
Reporting Country/ Territory*/Area Total  confirmed  cases  Total
deaths  Total  recovery Equatorial Guinea Cabo Verde Sierra Leone
International conveyance
 Islam et al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 260280,  June  2020
Reporting Country/ Territory*/Area Imported from Border Transmis‐
sion Local Transmission China (Except Hubei) Wuhan,  Italy  Local
transmission China, Hongkong, UK Local transmission Hong Kong Lo‐
cal transmission China, Singapore Local transmission  China,  USA
Local  transmission  Local transmission China, Japan, Iran, Italy
Local transmission Local transmission Japan, Taiwan,  USA,  South
Korea Local transmission Viet Nam China, France/ UK, Italy, South
Korea Local transmission Brunei Darussalam  Imported  cases  only
Local transmission New Zealand Iran, Italy Local transmission Im‐
ported cases only French Polynesia* Western  Pacific  Region  Im‐
ported  cases only European Region Local transmission Italy, Iran
Local transmission Singapore,  Italy,  China  Local  transmission
Singapore, Italy, China Local transmission Local transmission Lo‐
cal transmission Italy, Germany, Iran  Local  transmission  Local
transmission The United Kingdom France, China, Japan, Italy, Iran
Local transmission Local transmission China, France, Italy  Local
transmission  China,  Italy, Iran Local transmission Local trans‐
mission Local transmission Italy, Israel or Egypt Local transmis‐
sion Japan, Italy, Germany, France, Spain, Local transmission Lo‐
cal transmission San Marino Local transmission Italy, Austria Lo‐
cal  transmission  Local  transmission  Local  transmission Local
transmission Local transmission Russian Federation  China,  Italy
Imported cases only Iran, Italy Imported cases only Imported cas‐
es only
 Islam et al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 260280,  June  2020
Reporting Country/ Territory*/Area Imported from Border Transmis‐
sion Local Transmission Local  transmission  Under  investigation
Imported  cases  only Local transmission Iran, Italy Local trans‐
mission Imported cases only Iran, Italy Imported cases only Local
transmission  Iran, Italy Imported cases only Imported cases only
Local transmission North Macedonia  Local  transmission  Imported
cases  only  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina Local transmission Imported
cases only Imported cases only Imported cases only Imported cases
only  Imported cases only Imported cases only Under investigation
Imported cases only Imported cases only Vatican City Under inves‐
tigation  Faroe  Islands* Imported cases only Under investigation
Imported cases only Imported cases only Japan, Iran, Italy  Local
transmission Italy, Iran, Thailand/ Malaysia, Greece Local trans‐
mission Local transmission Local transmission Italy, Germany  Lo‐
cal transmission Sri Lanka Imported cases only Imported cases on‐
ly Imported cases only USA/  France  Imported  cases  only  Local
transmission  Imported  cases only Local transmission United Arab
Emirates China,  Iran  Local  transmission  Imported  cases  only
South‐East Asia Region Eastern Mediterranean Region
 Islam  et  al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 260280, June 2020
Reporting Country/ Territory*/Area Imported from Border Transmis‐
sion  Local  Transmission  Local  transmission China, Italy Local
transmission Iran, UK Local transmission  Saudi  Arabia  Imported
cases only Local transmission Iran, Italy Imported cases only Im‐
ported cases only Italy, France Imported cases only Imported cas‐
es only Imported cases only Occupied Palestinian territory* Local
transmission United States of America China, Japan, South  Korea,
Iran,  Italy  Local  transmission China, Iran, Egypt, Italy Local
transmission Local transmission South‐East Asian  country,  Italy
Local transmission Imported cases only Costa Rica Local transmis‐
sion Spain/ France Local transmission Local  transmission  Spain,
Italy Imported cases only Imported cases only Imported cases only
Italy, Canada Imported cases only  Imported  cases  only  Bolivia
(Plurinational  State of) Imported cases only Imported cases only
Spain, Switzerland Imported cases only Imported  cases  only  Im‐
ported  cases  only  St. Lucia Imported cases only Imported cases
only  Saint  Vincent  and  the  Grenadines  Imported  cases  only
Trinidad  and  Tobago Imported cases only Imported cases only Im‐
ported cases only French Guiana*  Imported  cases  only  Imported
cases  only  Saint  Martin* Under investigation Saint Barthelemy*
Under investigation Region of the Americas African  Region  Local
transmission South Africa Italy, Germany, Portugal Imported cases
only Imported cases only
 Islam et al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 260280,  June  2020
Reporting Country/ Territory*/Area Imported from Border Transmis‐
sion Local Transmission Burkina Faso Imported  cases  only  Local
transmission  Imported cases only Ivory Coast Imported cases only
Imported cases only Imported cases only Imported cases only  Nor‐
way, Turkey Imported cases only Japan/ Burkina Faso Imported cas‐
es only Germany/ France/ Turkey Local transmission Imported cases
only  China,  Japan  Local  transmission International conveyance
cases as of 22 January to 2 April, 2020 (reproduced from [49]).
 Islam et al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 260280,  June  2020
(reproduced from [55]).
 Islam  et  al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 260280, June 2020
(B) Selective countries (reproduced from [55]).
 Islam et al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 260280, June 2020

























































