Laboratory diagnosis of SARS‐CoV‐2: available approaches and lim‐
itations J. M. Abduljalil The ongoing pandemic  of  severe  acute
respiratory  syndrome  coronavirus  2  (SARS‐CoV‐2) is one of the
most devastating outbreaks witnessed in the last 100  years.  The
outbreak  started  in  China  and  spread rapidly to almost every
country, culminating in woefully overwhelmed health‐care  systems
in most countries. The only approved diagnostic test to accompany
radiographic evaluation is reverse  transcription  PCR.  However,
the  applicability  of this test in diagnosis and surveillance is
challenged by a global shortage of reagents and the lack of well‐
equipped  laboratories with specialized staff in several low‐ and
middle‐income countries. Loop‐mediated isothermal amplication and
CRISPR‐based  diagnostic  assays  have  developed and expected to
play a role however, their accuracy is still inferior to the rec‐
ommended  PCR  approach. The need for the development of accurate
and rapid diagnostic assays  became  apparent.   Immunodiagnostic
tests  and  other molecular approaches were developed and tested.
Other recently developed point‐of‐care molecular  tests  are  ex‐
pected  to  be  helpful  in  pandemic management as no particular
skills are required from  the  operator.  Fortunately,  a  number
chemiluminescence  platforms  or lateral ow cassettes.  Keywords:
Antigen, Coronavirus disease 2019,  Isothermal  amplication,  Na‐
sopharyngeal swab, Real‐time RT‐PCR, Serology Medically important
coronaviruses were identied from the nasal secretions of patients
with  mild colds for the rst time in the 1960s. Generally, coron‐
aviruses are spherical (80160 nm), pleomorphic,  enveloped,  sin‐
gle‐stranded,  positive‐sense  RNA viruses [1]. Their helical nu‐
cleocapsid surrounds a nonsegmented genome (2732  kb)  character‐
ized  by a 5‐end containing genes important for viral replication
and pathogenesis in the host cell [2]. The 3‐end  genomic  region
harbours  genes  for  nucleocapsid  and membrane proteins [3]. In
2003, the animal coronavirus severe  acute  respiratory  syndrome
coronavirus (SARS‐CoV) was described; it crossed the species bar‐
rier and resulted in the epidemic  of  severe  acute  respiratory
syndrome (SARS) in China and nearby countries. Middle East respi‐
ratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS‐CoV)  was  described  in  2012,
when  an outbreak took place in the Middle East of a similar dis‐
ease called Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) [4]. A  third
animal coronavirus to be described, severe acute respiratory syn‐
drome coronavirus 2 (SARS‐CoV‐2),  originated  from  the  Chinese
city of Wuhan and led to the ongoing pandemic of coronavirus dis‐
ease 2019 (COVID‐19) [5]. SARSCoV‐2 seems to  have  spilled  over
from the bat population through an intermediate host (most likely
the pangolin) [6].  Since the ofcial announcement of  this  novel
coronavirus  (known then as 2019‐nCoV) in China in December 2019,
the global conrmed cases had reached 6 663 304 in more  than  190
countries  and territories with a total of 392 802 deaths as of 6
June 2020 (10:00 CEST) [7]. Similar to SARS‐CoV and MERSCoV,  in‐
fections  of  SARS‐CoV‐2  predominate in adults and men without a
conrmed underlying cause [8]. The majority of New Microbe and New
Infect  2020;  36: 100713 New Microbes and New Infections, Volume
36 Number C, SARS‐CoV‐2 infections are subclinical, whereas symp‐
tomatic  patients  usually present with cough, fever, fatigue and
groundglass appearance of lungs on radiographic imaging [9].  Ad‐
mission  to  intensive  care  units  is common because of the bad
prognosis in individuals with co‐morbidities and in  the  elderly
population  [10,11].  The  clinical  management of SARS‐CoV‐2 The
laboratory‐based approach to the diagnosis of SARSCoV‐2 is  real‐
time  reverse transcription PCR (rRT‐PCR) approved by the WHO and
by the US CDC. Due to the pandemic situation,  testing  laborato‐
ries  were  overwhelmed  and shortage of reagents became a global
issue. The introduction of accurate serological  tests  will  un‐
doubtedly facilitate pandemic management, in addition to reducing
time, costs and workloads in national  laboratories  and  health‐
care  systems. For accurate diagnosis, rRT‐PCR should be accompa‐
nied by computed tomography (CT) radioimaging [14].  Indeed,  pa‐
tients  were found to develop ground‐glass appearance on chest CT
before the successful detection of viral RNA. Generally,  rRT‐PCR
results  turn  positive  46 days after lung manifestations become
apparent on radiographs [15].  Next‐generation sequencing and mi‐
croarray  analyses  are  not  currently  applied for diagnosis of
SARS‐CoV‐2; however,  these  techniques  are  important  research
tools for the scrutiny of provide a concise view of the currently
known diagnostic tests for SARS‐CoV‐2. Laboratory staff should be
aware of the importance of continually consulting up‐to‐date lab‐
oratory for infectious diseases as information becomes  available
or more accurate data are obtained regarding the disease and Con‐
siderations before laboratory testing As of 12 May 2020, the  WHO
denes  a  suspected  case as A patient with any acute respiratory
illness and having been in contact with  a  conrmed  or  probable
COVID‐19 case in the last 14 days before symptom onset [17]. How‐
ever, this denition is not valid in countries where SARS‐CoV‐2 is
spreading  widely  in  a  community transmission pattern. In such
communities, acquiring the infection may occur  by  contact  with
asymptomatic  untested  cases. Hence, an individual with relevant
clinical manifestations not fully explained  by  other  aetiology
should be considered as a suspected case [12].  Diagnosis of sus‐
pected and asymptomatic cases is of paramount importance  in  the
management  and  control of outbreaks. When testing is not possi‐
ble, specimens should be shipped, according to WHO  instructions,
to the nearest reference laboratory [18]. It should be noted that
a negative result does not rule out the infection and the  tested
person  may  be still in the rst days of infection when viral RNA
load in caution and follow‐up testing are recommended for  highly
suspected  individuals.  It  should be noted that most SARS‐CoV‐2
tests are currently approved to be  implemented  only  under  the
current  emergency situation and manufacturer‐independent evalua‐
tion for test performance is  mostly  lacking.  In  other  words,
clinical  correlation with patient history and radiographic imag‐
ing is necessary to determine the correct infection status.   Di‐
agnostic  specimens:  types  and times For general procedures for
specimen collection, interim guides from the WHO and CDC are  the
best  to  consult [18,19].  Notably, different respiratory speci‐
mens (from upper and lower parts of the tract) were found to have
different detection rates of SARS‐CoV‐2. Indeed, variations occur
between patients and even  in  the  same  individual  during  the
course of the illness; the pattern of viral shedding is not fully
understood [2022]. For instance,  nasopharyngeal  specimens  have
shown  negative  results,  while viral RNA was detected in sputum
specimens from the same patients [23]. Additionally, the accuracy
of  the  test  depends  on specimen quality and quantity, time of
collection during the course of the  disease,  and  the  inherent
quality  of  the  test kit [15].  Swab specimens are not possible
from bedridden patients with severe  respiratory  involvement  or
those  undergoing  mechanical ventilation. Invasive procedures to
obtain endotracheal aspirates, sputum and  bronchial  lavage  are
possible  ways  to  obtain  specimens  from such patients. Throat
swabs were found to result in false‐negative results as viral RNA
was recovered from sputum samples of patients after viral load in
the throat illness progresses, lower respiratory tract  specimens
become  the best choice [22,26]. However, collection of specimens
from the lower respiratory tract may increase infection  risk  to
health‐care workers owing to aerosol generation during collection
procedures [27]. Saliva and nasal wash specimens have been  found
to  be  good  alternatives,  especially when laboratory biosafety
measures cannot be met [2830]. Stool  and  blood  specimens  were
found  to  contain SARS‐CoV‐2 and viral RNA has been successfully
detected from such specimens by RT‐PCR; however, their diagnostic
value  has  not been studied thoroughly [31]. Lastly, minimum es‐
sential medium, sterile phosphate buffer, and 0.9%  saline  solu‐
tions  were all found to be alternatives to viral transport media
[32].  Specimen processing Upon receiving the specimen, immediate
testing  procedures should be performed in a biosafety cabinet of
class II or higher.  Care should be paid  to  minimizing  aerosol
generation during specimen manipulation. In addition to biosafety
precautions, the testing operator should be  aware  of  technical
factors affecting result accuracy [33]. For nucleic acid amplica‐
tion assays, the processing kit reagents should be the recommend‐
ed match with the PCR platform to be used [33]. Moreover, reagent
preparation and storage should be in accordance with the manufac‐
turers instructions. For RNA extraction phase, various bioMrieux)
have been validated by the CDC to work properly when  manufactur‐
ers  instructions  are  followed strictly [33].  Specimens should
quickly be diluted in lysis  buffer  containing  an  inactivating
agent  (guanidinium‐based  compounds  to  inactivate virions) and
non‐denaturing detergent to disrupt the lipid envelopes of respi‐
ratory epithelial cells and the virus. Additionally, lysis buffer
also prevents viral RNA degradation [34].  When self‐enclosed au‐
tomated systems are used, success of this step is optimally guar‐
anteed. The currently used systems are  ID  NOW  (Abbott,  Abbott
Park,  IL,  USA),  Cobas  Liat  (Roche  Molecular Systems, Basel,
Switzerland) and GeneXpert (Cepheid,  Sunnyvale,  CA,  USA).  Ex‐
tracted  RNA should be stored at or below 70C if subsequent steps
of analysis are to be performed later.  Detection  of  SARS‐CoV‐2
nucleic  acid There are two available categories for RNA amplica‐
tion tests for SARS‐CoV‐2; rRT‐PCR and  loop‐mediated  isothermal
amplication  (LAMP).  For SARS‐CoV‐2 detection, protocols of rRT‐
PCR were approved by WHO and the US Food and Drug  Administration
(FDA),  whereas  the isothermal amplication infections, RT‐PCR is
the most common tool due to its accuracy and popularity [35]. Ad‐
ditionally, less common amplication assays other than PCR are al‐
so used in the detection of RNA viruses. Nonetheless, the accura‐
cy  of  nucleic  acid amplication tests is ultimately affected by
mutations in the sequences targeted by test primers [36].   Real‐
time  RT‐PCR  Different  qualitative  rRT‐PCR protocols for SARS‐
CoV‐2 Laboratory diagnosis of SARS‐CoV‐2 [33,34,3739]. Two  diag‐
nostic  rRT‐PCR‐based  assays  are accepted for procurement under
Emergency Use Listing procedure;  Genesig  Real‐Time  PCR  Coron‐
avirus  (Primerdesign  Ltd, Southampton, UK) and Cobas SARS‐CoV‐2
6800/8800  system  (Roche  Molecular  Systems).  The  Cobas  6800
SARSCoV‐2  system from Roche was recently evaluated by Rocheinde‐
pendent researchers and found to be reliable for detecting  SARS‐
CoV‐2 RNA in nasopharyngeal specimens [40].  The rst rRT‐PCR pro‐
tocol developed  outside  China  incorporated  primers  targeting
genes of the envelope protein (E), nucleocapsid (N) and RNA poly‐
merase (RdRp) [39]. The primers of E and RdRp were the most  sen‐
sitive and were rapidly and widely adopted in Europe [41]. Howev‐
er, RdRp primers were found to cross‐react with RNA  of  SARS‐CoV
[42].  A  point  worth  mentioning is that reagent design has the
most inuential role on assay  performance,  therefore,  wellopti‐
mized  targets  are  expected to arise from different genomic se‐
quences of SARS‐CoV‐2.  Currently, numerous primers are  designed
to  target  various  RNA sequences in six genes of SARS‐CoV‐2 for
diagnostic purposes: ORF1a/b, ORF1b‐nsp14 (50 ‐UTR), RdRp (RNAde‐
pendent   RNA  polymerase),  S  (spike  protein),  E  (envelope),
N1/N2/N3 (nucleocapsid) and  RdRp/Hel  (RNA‐dependent  RNA  poly‐
merase/helicase).  Of  note, a recent study found nucleocapsid N2
and envelope E genes to be the most  sensitive  singleplex  reac‐
tions  and  no signicant change in cycle threshold (Ct) was noted
when both assays were combined [43]. The recommended rRT‐PCR  di‐
agnostic panel by CDC includes primers for (i) two specic regions
of SARS‐CoV‐2 nucleocapsid (N) gene and (ii) human RNase  P  gene
(RP)  in a one‐step qualitative RT‐PCR‐based detection [33].  Re‐
al‐time RT‐PCR tests have been positive in convalescent  patients
after earlier negative RT‐PCR tests performed in the same labora‐
tory with the same testing kit and same technician [4447].  False
results  in  rRT‐PCR may be attributed to various factors. Varia‐
tions in viral load kinetics may  lead  to  collecting  specimens
with less viral load resulting in false‐negative results.  False‐
negative results for RT‐PCR were also reported in cases of  typi‐
cal  CT  ndings of SARS‐CoV‐2 infection [48,49]. Indeed, some re‐
searchers found the sensitivity of rRT‐PCR to be  around  70%  in
SARS‐CoV‐2  diagnosis  [49]. Additionally, studies have indicated
that the SARS‐CoV‐2 genome is undergoing an evolutionary  process
through  mutations and active genetic recombination [50,51]. This
observation is expected because RNA viruses lack  efcient  proof‐
reading machinery to ensure delity of RNA replication [52]. Muta‐
tions in primer and probe targeted sequences may lead  to  false‐
negative  results,  but  can be reduced by targeting two or three
sequences within the viral genome.  New Microbes and  New  Infec‐
tions,  Volume  36  Number  C, FIG. 1. Principle of reverse tran‐
scription  loop‐mediated  isothermal  amplication  (RT‐LAMP).  B2
backwards  inner primer (BIP) anneals to the target RNA forming a
start point for reverse transcriptase to synthesize a  complemen‐
tary  DNA strand (cDNA) (1). The outer primer B3 anneals to a se‐
quence outside that of B2 to initiate synthesis  of  a  new  cDNA
(2).  During  synthesis  of the second cDNA, the former strand is
displaced by the reverse transcriptase (3). The displaced  strand
is  released  with  a loop at the 50 end. Forward inner primer F2
anneals to the 30 end of the newly released cDNA strand  and  DNA
polymerase  starts  synthesis  of a complementary DNA strand (4).
Forwards outer primer F3 anneals to the  30  end  of  the  strand
formed  by the F2 primer and DNA polymerase initiates the synthe‐
sis of new strand and simultaneous displacing of the former  (5).
The  recently  displaced  cDNA  strand contains complementary se‐
quences at both ends, hence it forms a dumbbell‐shaped  structure
(6).  This  structure  is the starting material for loop‐mediated
amplication cycles. It contains multiple  sites  for  amplication
initiation  and  is rapidly converted to stem‐loop DNA structures
in response to self‐primed synthesis at the 30 end  (7).  At  the
same  time, backwards inner primer B2 to the single‐stranded loop
region to start DNA synthesis culminating in long concatemers  (8
and 9). Further synthesis leads to dumbbell‐shaped structures and
accumulation of amplication dsDNA products (10).  Isothermal  am‐
plication assays Loop‐mediated isothermal amplication is based on
the technology of autocycling strand displacement  DNA  synthesis
via  special  DNA  polymerase  (Bst) (Fig. 1). In such tests, the
positive reaction is detected visually  or  by  simple  turbidity
measurement  [53].  Incorporation of uorescent intercalating dyes
to these tests is possible, allowing for real‐time monitoring  of
the  reaction [54]. The technique was further developed to enable
RNA detection by reverse transcription with  successful  applica‐
tion  in detection of numerous RNA viruses including H7N9 inuenza
virus, MERS‐CoV, West Nile virus and Zika virus the WHO or FDA to
be performed even under emergency situations. Successful applica‐
tion of real‐time LAMP tests in the SARS‐CoV‐2 pandemic will pos‐
itively  contribute  to  pandemic management because this test is
rapid (results are available in less than 1 hour) and can be per‐
formed using a small instrument at general laboratories in hospi‐
tals, at bedsides or in the eld.  Nonetheless,  primer  designing
for  LAMP tests is more difcult than in PCR assays.  A handful of
studies have developed, optimized and tested RT‐LAMP  assays  for
the  diagnosis  of  SARS‐CoV‐2  using primers for different genes
[5964]. Park et al. found primers of the nucleocapsid gene to  be
the  most  sensitive,  detecting  as low as 100 RNA copy/reaction
[60]. This level of detection is still considered high for sensi‐
tive  diagnosis  of  suspected cases.  Indeed, the primer sets of
another study targeting Or1ab and S genes  achieved  a  detection
level as low as 20 copies/reaction [59]. Moreover, high sensitiv‐
ity and specicity of RT‐LAMP were also found comparable  to  that
of  PCR  [60].  Next‐generation assays Applications of CRISPR‐Cas
technology in diagnostic microbiology and biomedicine is  growing
rapidly  [65].  Within the past 2 years, researchers invented new
diagnostic sensitive assays based on the  CRISPR‐Cas  system  for
detection  of  infectious  agents with minimal or no equipment to
perform the tests [66].  In April 2020, American  scientists  de‐
veloped  an RT‐LAMPbased CRISPR‐Cas assay on lateral ow strips to
detect the RNA of  SARS‐CoV‐2  in  extracts  from  nasopharyngeal
specimens  [67]. The assay is performed by dipping the test strip
into the RNA extract solution of the treated specimen  and  after
40 minutes the results are visually read. The Cas12, protein com‐
ponent of CRISPR‐Cas, is guided by specially designed  associated
RNA (gRNA) to base‐pair with a specic RNA sequence of SARS‐CoV‐2.
When the Cas12gRNA complex recognizes the  targeted  sequence,  a
labelled  single‐stranded  DNA reporter probe is cleaved by Cas12
to liberate a uorescent molecule visible to naked  eye.  However,
its  current  sensitivity is lower than of rRT‐PCR. As in nucleic
acid amplication assays, CRISPR‐based diagnostics  are  also  ex‐
pected  to  generate  false results if mutations have occurred in
the targeted Immunodiagnostic approaches Immunodiagnostic  point‐
of‐care  tests generating rapid results (in less than 1 hour) are
less complex than molecular tests.  Based  on  current  evidence,
seroconversion  for  SARS‐CoV‐2 was found to occurs between 7 and
11 days after onset of symptoms [68]. Consequently, antibody  de‐
tection  assays might be impractical for diagnosis of acute (cur‐
rent) infection at the early stage. Nonetheless, these tests  may
be  useful in epidemiological surveillance (retrospective evalua‐
tion), contact tracing and research studies addressing neutraliz‐
ing  the FDA [69]. Six of these tests are to be performed only in
Laboratory diagnosis of SARS‐CoV‐2 laboratories certied  to  per‐
form  high  complexity  tests, whereas the remaining panel can be
performed in laboratories with requirement of moderate complexity
tests. Antibody detecting tests are either run on ELISA, chemilu‐
minescence (Cobas analysers platforms) or rapid‐test  lateral  ow
cassettes. On the other hand, a single lateral ow cassette (Soa 2
SARS antigen FIA from Quidel, San Diego, CA, USA) was nasopharyn‐
geal  and nasal swabs. Other antibody‐detecting tests exploit re‐
combinant nucleocapsid antigens to  detect/  quantify  anti‐SARS‐
CoV‐2  antibodies  in  blood. However, dozens have been developed
and introduced to markets with  limited  independent  validation.
Due  to high nucleotide sequence similarity with SARS‐CoV, cross‐
reactivity is expected in such tests and their sensitivity is ex‐
pected  to  range  from  34% to 80% [7072]. Some lateral ow rapid
test kits have the capacity to detect IgM and IgG  or  viral  and
past  SARS‐CoV‐2  infections. Theoretically, such assays will de‐
crease the time, costs and labour of testing in comparison to nu‐
cleic  acid  amplication assays. The majority of available immun‐
odiagnostic tests are based on the principle of  immunochromatog‐
raphy  (i.e.  lateral  ow) (Fig. 2). However, sampling variations
and variations between individuals in terms of viral load are im‐
portant factors affecting the accuracy of such assays Antigen de‐
tection tests Rapid antigen detection kits are generally  charac‐
terized  by  suboptimal  sensitivity and specicity [73]. Nonethe‐
less, unique and conserved  domains  of  proteins  in  SARS‐CoV‐2
could  be  exploited  to  develop sensitive testing kits. Two ap‐
proaches are expected to increase the sensitivity of such  tests:
(i)  prior treatment to concentrate the targeted antigen and (ii)
use of monoclonal antibodies to different epitopes of the antigen
to be detected. Two recent pre‐print studies reported a sensitiv‐
ity range of 93%100% and 100% specicity of the immunochromatogra‐
phy  SARS‐CoV‐2  antigen  tests  targeting N protein [74,75] (ac‐
cessed 13 May 2020).  Serological tests against SARS‐CoV‐2  [69].
Such tests are mostly based on the principles of immunochromatog‐
raphy, chemiluminescence or ELISA to detect IgG or IgG and IgM in
serum. Serodiagnosis is believed to be useful in convalescent pa‐
tients with negative PCR ndings, as the accuracy of molecular as‐
says  is  inuenced  by New Microbes and New Infections, Volume 36
Number C, FIG. 2. Principle of immunochromatography. This drawing
shows  lateral  ow  to detect an antigen. The specimen containing
the antigen (Analyte) is placed on the sample pad.  The  antigen,
with  the  uid, moves to the conjugate pad where it is bound by a
labelled antibody specic to the targeted antigen.  The  conjugate
pad also contains labelled antibodies nonspecic to the antigen to
be detected.  through the nitrocellulose membrane and  reach  the
Test line area. In this area, antigen‐specic antibodies are immo‐
bilized to catch the antigenantibody complexes accumulate in this
area,  the line becomes visible to the naked eye.  The non‐specic
antibodies also migrate and pass the Test line to reach the  Con‐
trol  line  area  and that line also becomes visible. The test is
considered positive only when the two lines (T and C)  are  visi‐
ble.  (Reproduced  from Paulini et al. [82]).  viral shedding dy‐
namics [20]. However, cross‐reactivity with other antibodies is a
major  challenge  to serological tests. In fact, the prole of the
humoral immune response to SARS‐CoV‐2 is still partially  unknown
[76,77].  From the second week of assays. In the third week after
onset of symptoms, the IgM titre peaks  and  then  gradually  de‐
creases  whereas  IgG  stabilises  around  4 weeks [68,77,78]. It
should be noted that interference from other antibodies,  mounted
against other phylogenetically related viruses, is to be evaluat‐
ed.  With the exception of immunodecient individuals,  infections
of  SARS‐CoV‐2  result  in cell‐mediated immunity and humoral re‐
sponses by IgM, IgA and IgG uniformly in  all  patients.  IgM  is
usually the rst class to be produced within the rst week of onset
followed by robust IgG immunity [77]. IgM and IgG  against  SARS‐
CoV‐2  were  detected  by  quantitative ELISA and qualitative im‐
munochromatography assays with an increase in detection rates  as
the  course  of the illness progressed [79,80]. However, a recent
study (of a small sample size and still as a preprint)  from  Ox‐
ford  accurate  than  lateral ow strips with high sensitivity for
IgG from day 10 after onset [81]. Another  immunodiagnostic  test
for  quantitative measurement of interleukin‐6 (Elecsys IL‐6 from
Roche Diagnostics) has also been granted an helpful in  determin‐
ing the risk of intubation with mechanical ventilation as it mea‐
sures the level of inammatory response in individuals with  SARS‐
CoV‐2.   The  choice of specimen type for SARS‐CoV‐2 diagnosis is
subject to patient condition and stage  of  the  disease  course.
Specimens from upper respiratory tract are the best choice during
the early days of the illness, wheras sputum is the  most  sensi‐
tive at later stages. Owing to occasional false results with rRT‐
PCR, CT radiography should be obtained to reach an accurate diag‐
nosis  and  for proper management. As in other RNA viruses, muta‐
tions and other genetic changes are likely to  occur,  which  may
result  in  pitfalls  of nucleic acid amplication assays. Genomic
homology of SARS‐CoV‐2 with other coronaviruses is also  a  chal‐
lenge  to  serological  and antigen detection tests. However, im‐
provements in such point‐of‐care tests are  expected  to  aid  in
better management of the pandemic as they are rapid and simple to
perform. Epidemiological studies will be  easily  conducted  once
accurate serological tests become available.  This work is a per‐
sonal effort and did not receive any specic  Conict  of  interest
conict of interest.  [1] Saif LJ, Wang Q, Vlasova AN, Jung K, Xi‐
ao S. Coronaviruses. In: Zimmerman JJ, Karriker  LA,  Ramirez  A,
Schwartz  KJ,  Stevenson  GW,  Sons,  Ltd;  2019. p. 488523.  [2]
Yoshimoto FK. The proteins of severe acute  respiratory  syndrome
coronavirus‐2  (SARS  CoV‐2  or  n‐COV19), the cause of COVID‐19.
Protein J 2020;39:198216.  [3] Wu A, Peng Y,  Huang  B,  Ding  X,
Wang  X,  Niu  P, et al. Genome composition and divergence of the
novel coronavirus (2019‐nCoV) originating in China. Cell Host Mi‐
crobe  2020;27:3258.  [4] de Wit E, van Doremalen N, Falzarano D,
Munster VJ. SARS and MERS: [5] Zhu N, Zhang D, Wang W, Li X, Yang
B,  Song J, et al. A novel coronavirus from patients with pneumo‐
nia in China, 2019. N Engl J [6] Zhang T, Wu Q, Zhang Z. Probable
pangolin  origin  of SARS‐CoV‐2 associated with the COVID‐19 out‐
break. Curr Biol 2020;30:134651.   [8]  Del  Rio  C,  Malani  PN.
COVID‐19‐new  insights  on  a  rapidly  changing  epidemic.  JAMA
2020;323:133940.  [9] Abduljalil JM, Abduljalil BM. Epidemiology,
genome,  and  clinical features of the pandemic SARS‐CoV‐2: a re‐
cent view. New Microbe. New [10] Wu Z, McGoogan JM.  Characteris‐
tics  of  and important lessons from the coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID‐19) outbreak in China: summary of a report of 72 314 cases
from  the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention. JAMA
2020;323:123942.  [11] Paules CI, Marston HD,  Fauci  AS.  Coron‐
avirus   infectionsmore   than   just   the   common  cold.  JAMA
2020;323:7078.  [12] World Health Organization. Clinical  manage‐
ment  of COVID‐19.  Geneva: WHO; 2020.  [13] World Health Organi‐
zation. Clinical management of severe acute respiratory infection
when  COVID‐19  is  suspected  (v1.2). Geneva: WHO; 2020. p. 121.
Laboratory diagnosis of SARS‐CoV‐2 [14] Wang Y, Kang  H,  Liu  X,
Tong  Z. Combination of RT‐qPCR testing and clinical features for
diagnosis of COVID‐19 facilitates management of  SARS‐CoV‐2  out‐
break.  J Med Virol 2020;92:5389.  [15] Ai T, Yang Z, Hou H, Zhan
C, Chen C, Lv W, et al. Correlation of [16] Li B, Si H‐R, Zhu  Y,
Yang  X‐L,  Anderson  DE, Shi Z‐L, et al. Discovery of bat coron‐
aviruses through surveillance and probe capture‐based [17]  World
Health  Organization.  Global surveillance for COVID‐19 caused by
human  infection  with  COVID‐19  virus.   Geneva:   WHO;   2020.
who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel‐coronavirus‐2019/technical‐
guidance. [Accessed 25 April 2020].   [19]  Centers  for  Disease
Control     and    Prevention.    Clinical    specimens:    novel
2019‐ncov/lab/guidelines‐clinical‐specimens.html.  [Accessed   27
April  [20]  He  X,  Lau EHY, Wu P, Deng X, Wang J, Hao X, et al.
Temporal dynamics  in  viral  shedding  and  transmissibility  of
COVID‐19.  Nat Med [21] Liu Y, Yan LM, Wan L, Xiang TX, Le A, Liu
JM, et al. Viral dynamics in mild and severe cases  of  COVID‐19.
Lancet Infect Dis 2020:12.  [22] Zou L, Ruan F, Huang M, Liang L,
Huang H, Hong Z, et al. SARS‐CoV‐2 viral load in upper respirato‐
ry  specimens  of infected patients. N Engl J [23] Winichakoon P,
Chaiwarith R, Liwsrisakun C, Salee P, Goonna A,  Limsukon  A,  et
al.  Negative  nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs do not rule
out COVID‐19. J Clin Microbiol 2020;58:12.  [24] World Health Or‐
ganization.  Report of the WHO‐China joint mission on coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID‐19). Geneva: WHO; 2020.  [25]  Joynt  GM,  Wu
WK. Understanding COVID‐19: what does viral RNA [26] Pan Y, Zhang
D, Yang P, Poon LLM, Wang Q. Viral load of SARS‐CoV2 in  clinical
samples.  Lancet  Infect Dis 2020;20:4112.  [27] Tran K, Cimon K,
Severn M, Pessoa‐Silva CL, Conly J. Aerosol generating procedures
and  risk  of transmission of acute respiratory [28] Azzi L, Car‐
cano G, Gianfagna F, Grossi P, Gasperina DD,  Genoni  A,  et  al.
Saliva  is  a  reliable tool to detect SARS‐CoV‐2. J Infect 2020.
[29] Tang Y‐W, Schmitz JE, Persing DH, Stratton CW. The laborato‐
ry  diagnosis  of  COVID‐19  infection:  current issues and chal‐
lenges. J Clin [30] To KK‐W, Tsang OT‐Y, Yip CC‐Y, Chan  K‐H,  Wu
T‐C,  Chan JM‐C, et al. Consistent detection of 2019 novel coron‐
avirus in saliva. Clin [31] Yeo C, Kaushal S, Yeo D. Enteric  in‐
volvement  of  coronaviruses: is faecaloral transmission of SARS‐
CoV‐2 possible? Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol  2020;5:3357.   [32]
Rodino  KG,  Espy MJ, Buckwalter SP, Walchak RC, Germer JJ, Fern‐
holz E, et al. Evaluation of saline,  phosphate  buffered  saline
and  minimum  essential medium as potential alternatives to viral
transport [33] Centers for Disease Control  and  Prevention.  CDC
real‐time  RT‐PCR  diagnostic panel. Atlanta, GA: CDC; 2020.  New
Microbes and New Infections, Volume 36 Number C,  [34]  Chu  DKW,
Pan  Y,  Cheng SMS, Hui KPY, Krishnan P, Liu Y, et al.  Molecular
diagnosis of a novel coronavirus (2019‐nCoV) causing an  outbreak
of pneumonia. Clin Chem 2020;66:54955.  [35] Grifn DW, Gibson CJ,
Lipp EK, Riley K, Paul JH, Rose JB. Detection of viral  pathogens
by reverse transcriptase PCR and of microbial indicators by stan‐
dard methods in the canals of the Florida Keys. Appl Environ  Mi‐
crobiol  1999;65:411825.   [36]  Bustin  SA, Nolan T. Pitfalls of
quantitative real‐time reverse‐transcription polymerase chain re‐
action.  J  Biomol  Tech  2004;15:15566.   [37] Nao N, Shirato K,
Katano H, Matsuyama S, Takeda M.  Detection  of  second  case  of
2019‐nCoV  infection  in Japan. 2020. Tokyo.  [38] Chinese Center
for Disease Control and Prevention. Emergency response  technical
centre.  Laboratory  testing  for COVID‐19. Beijing: Chinese CDC;
2020.  [39] Corman VM, Landt O, Kaiser M, Molenkamp R, Meijer  A,
Chu  DKW,  et al. Detection of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019‐nCoV)
by real‐time [40] Poljak M, Korva M, Knap Gasper N,  Fujs  Komlos
K,  Sagadin  M,  Ursic T, et al. Clinical evaluation of the cobas
SARS‐CoV‐2 test and a diagnostic platform switch during 48  hours
in the midst of the COVID‐19 [41] Reusken CBEM, Broberg EK, Haag‐
mans B, Meijer A, Corman VM, Papa A, et al. Laboratory  readiness
and  response for novel coronavirus (2019‐nCoV) in expert labora‐
tories in 30 EU/EEA countries25.  [42] Chan JF‐W,  Yip  CC‐Y,  To
KK‐W,  Tang TH‐C, Wong SC‐Y, Leung K‐H, et al. Improved molecular
diagnosis of COVID‐19 by the novel, highly sensitive  and  specic
COVID‐19‐RdRp/Hel real‐time reverse transcription‐PCR assay vali‐
dated in vitro and with clinical [43] Waggoner JJ, Stittleburg V,
Pond  R, Saklawi Y, Sahoo MK, Babiker A, et al. Triplex real‐time
RT‐PCR for severe acute respiratory syndrome [44] Xing Y,  Mo  P,
Xiao  Y, Zhao O, Zhang Y, Wang F. Post‐discharge surveillance and
positive virus detection in  two  medical  staff  recovered  from
coronavirus  disease  2019 (COVID‐19), China, January to [45] Lan
L, Xu D, Ye G, Xia C, Wang S, Li Y, et al. Positive  RT‐PCR  test
results  in patients recovered from COVID‐19. JAMA 2020;323: [46]
Chen D, Xu W, Lei Z, Huang Z, Liu J, Gao Z, et al. Recurrence  of
positive  SARS‐CoV‐2 RNA in COVID‐19: a case report. Int J Infect
Dis [47] Zhang J, Yan K, Ye H, Lin J, Zheng J, Cai T.  SARS‐CoV‐2
turned  positive  in  a  discharged patient with COVID‐19 arouses
concern regarding the present standard for discharge. Int  J  In‐
fect Dis 2020.  [48] Wong HYF, Lam HYS, Fong AH‐T, Leung ST, Chin
TW‐Y, Lo CSY, et al. Frequency and distribution of  chest  radio‐
graphic  ndings  in  [49]  Fang Y, Zhang H, Xie J, Lin M, Ying L,
Pang P, et al. Sensitivity of chest CT for  COVID‐19:  comparison
to  RT‐PCR.  Radiology  2020:200432.  [50] Sun J, He W‐T, Wang L,
Lai A, Ji X, Zhai X, et al.  COVID‐19:  epidemiology,  evolution,
and    cross‐disciplinary    perspectives.    Trends    Mol   Med
2020;26:48395.  [51] Phan T. Genetic diversity and  evolution  of
SARS‐CoV‐2.  Infect  Genet [52] Sanjun R, Domingo‐Calap P. Mecha‐
nisms of viral mutation. Cell Mol Life Sci 2016;73:443348.   [53]
Notomi T, Mori Y, Tomita N, Kanda H. Loop‐mediated isothermal am‐
plication (LAMP): principle, features, and future  prospects.   J
Microbiol  2015;53:15.  [54] Oscorbin IP, Belousova EA, Zakabunin
AI, Boyarskikh UA, Filipenko ML. Comparison of uorescent interca‐
lating dyes for quantitative loop‐mediated isothermal amplication
(qLAMP). Biotechniques 2016;61:205.  [55] Huang P, Wang H, Cao Z,
Jin H, Chi H, Zhao J, et al. A rapid and specic assay for the de‐
tection of MERS‐CoV. Front Microbiol  2018;9:  [56]  Chotiwan  N,
Brewster CD, Magalhaes T, Weger‐Lucarelli J, Duggal NK, Rckert C,
et al. Rapid and specic detection of Asian‐ and [57] Cao Z,  Wang
H,  Wang  L,  Li  L, Jin H, Xu C, et al. Visual detection of West
Nile Virus using reverse transcription  loop‐mediated  isothermal
amplication  combined  with  a  vertical  ow visualization strip.
Front [58] Ge Y, Wu B, Qi X, Zhao K, Guo X, Zhu Y, et  al.  Rapid
and  sensitive  detection  of novel avian‐origin inuenza a (H7N9)
virus by reverse transcription loop‐mediated isothermal  amplica‐
tion  combined  with a lateral‐ow device. PLoS One 2013;8:e69941.
[59] Yan C, Cui J, Huang L, Du B, Chen L, Xue G, et al. Rapid and
visual  detection of 2019 novel coronavirus (SARS‐CoV‐2) by a re‐
verse transcription loop‐mediated isothermal  amplication  assay.
Clin  1016/j.jmoldx.2020.03.006.  in press.  [61] Lu R, Wu X, Wan
Z, Li Y, Zuo L, Qin J, et al.  Development  of  a  novel  reverse
transcription  loop‐mediated  isothermal  amplication method [62]
Baek YH, Um J, Antigua KJC, Park J‐H, Kim Y, Oh S, et al.  Devel‐
opment of a reverse transcription‐loop‐mediated isothermal ampli‐
cation as a rapid early‐detection method  for  novel  SARS‐CoV‐2.
Emerg  Microbe.  Infect  2020;9:9981007.  [63] Yu L, Wu S, Hao X,
Dong X, Mao L, Pelechano V, et al. Rapid  detection  of  COVID‐19
coronavirus using a reverse transcriptional loopmediated isother‐
mal amplication (RT‐LAMP) diagnostic platform.  [64] Lu R, Wu  X,
Wan  Z, Li Y, Jin X, Zhang C. A Novel Reverse transcription loop‐
mediated isothermal amplication method for rapid  [65]  Foss  DV,
Hochstrasser ML, Wilson RC. Clinical applications of CRISPR‐based
genome editing and diagnostics. Transfusion 2019;59: [66] Chiu C.
Cutting‐edge  infectious  disease  diagnostics  with CRISPR. Cell
Host Microbe 2018;23:7024.  [67] Broughton  JP,  Deng  X,  Yu  G,
Fasching CL, Servellita V, Singh J, et al.  CRISPRCas12‐based de‐
tection of SARS‐CoV‐2. Nat Biotechnol [68]  Long  Q‐X,  Liu  B‐Z,
Deng H‐J, Wu G‐C, Deng K, Chen Y‐K, et al.  Antibody responses to
SARS‐CoV‐2 in patients  with  COVID‐19.  Nat  [70]  Bruning  AHL,
Leeang  MMG, Vos JMBW, Spijker R, de Jong MD, Wolthers KC, et al.
Rapid tests for inuenza, respiratory syncytial Dhla  M,  Boesecke
C,  Schulte B, Diegmann C, Sib E, Richter E, et al.  Rapid point‐
of‐care testing for SARS‐CoV‐2 in a community  screening  setting
shows  low sensitivity. Public Health 2020;182:1702.  Li Z, Yi Y,
Luo X, Xiong N, Liu Y, Li S, et al. Development and clinical  ap‐
plication  of  a  rapid  IgM‐IgG combined antibody test for SARS‐
CoV‐2 Merckx J, Wali R, Schiller I, Caya C, Gore GC, Chartrand C,
et  al.  Diagnostic accuracy of novel and traditional rapid tests
for inuenza Porte L, Legarraga P, Vollrath V, Aguilera X,  Munita
JM,  Araos R, et al.  Evaluation of novel antigen‐based rapid de‐
tection test for the diagnosis Diao B, Wen K, Chen J, Liu Y, Yuan
Z, Han C, et al. Diagnosis of acute Qin C, Zhou L, Hu Z, Zhang S,
Yang S, Tao Y, et al. Dysregulation of  immune  response  in  pa‐
tients  with  COVID‐19 in Wuhan, China. Clin Laboratory diagnosis
of SARS‐CoV‐2 [77] Prompetchara E, Ketloy C, Palaga T. Immune re‐
sponses  in COVID‐19 and potential vaccines: lessons learned from
SARS and MERS epidemic.  [79] Jskelinen AJ, Keklinen  E,  Kallio‐
Kokko  H, Mannonen L, Kortela E, [80] Pan Y, Li X, Yang G, Fan J,
Tang Y, Zhao J, et al. Serological immunochromatographic approach
in diagnosis with SARS‐CoV‐2 infected [81] Adams ER, Ainsworth M,
Anand R, Andersson MI, Auckland K, Baillie JK,  et  al.  Antibody
testing for COVID‐19: a report from the [82] Paulini I, Siqueira‐
Silva J, Thomaz L, Rocha L, Harsi C, Bellei N, et  al.   Develop‐
ment  of a prototype immunochromatographic test for rapid diagno‐
sis of  respiratory  adenovirus  infection.  Braz  J  Infect  Dis
2017;21:



























