Applied and Environmental Science
Increasing Temperature and Relative Humidity Accelerates
Inactivation of SARS-CoV-2 on Surfaces
Security Science and Technology Directorate, Fort Detrick, Maryland, USA
Censeo Consulting Group Inc., Washington, DC, USA
ABSTRACT Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) was rst identied in China in late
2019 and is caused by newly identied severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Previous studies had reported the stability of SARS-CoV-2 in cell
culture media and deposited onto surfaces under a limited set of environmental
conditions. Here, we broadly investigated the effects of relative humidity, temperature, and droplet size on the stability of SARS-CoV-2 in a simulated clinically relevant
matrix dried on nonporous surfaces. The results show that SARS-CoV-2 decayed
more rapidly when either humidity or temperature was increased but that droplet
volume (1 to 50 l) and surface type (stainless steel, plastic, or nitrile glove) did not
signicantly impact decay rate. At room temperature (24C), virus half-life ranged
from 6.3 to 18.6 h depending on the relative humidity but was reduced to 1.0 to
8.9 h when the temperature was increased to 35C. These ndings suggest that a
potential for fomite transmission may persist for hours to days in indoor environments and have implications for assessment of the risk posed by surface contamination in indoor environments.
IMPORTANCE Mitigating the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in clinical settings and
public spaces is critically important to reduce the number of COVID-19 cases while
effective vaccines and therapeutics are under development. SARS-CoV-2 transmission
is thought to primarily occur through direct person-to-person transfer of infectious
respiratory droplets or through aerosol-generating medical procedures. However,
contact with contaminated surfaces may also play a signicant role. In this context,
understanding the factors contributing to SARS-CoV-2 persistence on surfaces will
enable a more accurate estimation of the risk of contact transmission and inform
mitigation strategies. To this end, we have developed a simple mathematical model
that can be used to estimate virus decay on nonporous surfaces under a range of
conditions and which may be utilized operationally to identify indoor environments
in which the virus is most persistent.
KEYWORDS COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, contamination, coronavirus, fomite, half-life,
humidity, temperature, transmission
everal studies have reported the presence of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) genetic material on surfaces in coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) patient rooms and throughout hospital wards, indicating environmental contamination. Commonly contaminated items included ofce equipment (e.g.,
mice, keyboards, printers) and metal furnishings (e.g., doorknobs, handrails) (15).
However, those studies did not evaluate the presence of infectious virus on surfaces in
Citation Biryukov J, Boydston JA, Dunning RA,
Yeager JJ, Wood S, Reese AL, Ferris A, Miller D,
Weaver W, Zeitouni NE, Phillips A, Freeburger
D, Hooper I, Ratnesar-Shumate S, Yolitz J,
Krause M, Williams G, Dawson DG, Herzog A,
Dabisch P, Wahl V, Hevey MC, Altamura LA.
2020. Increasing temperature and relative
Copyright  2020 Biryukov et al. This is an
Address correspondence to Louis A. Altamura,
Jennifer Biryukov,a Jeremy A. Boydston,a Rebecca A. Dunning,a John J. Yeager,a Stewart Wood,a Amy L. Reese,a
Allison Ferris,a David Miller,a Wade Weaver,a Nathalie E. Zeitouni,a Aaron Phillips,a Denise Freeburger,a Idris Hooper,a
Shanna Ratnesar-Shumate,a Jason Yolitz,a Melissa Krause,a Gregory Williams,a David G. Dawson,a Artemas Herzog,b
Paul Dabisch,a Victoria Wahl,a Michael C. Hevey,a Louis A. Altamuraa
Biryukov et al.
a clinical setting. Disposable exam gloves also represent a source of fomite transmission, and this risk is likely elevated when they are used by individuals unaccustomed to
proper use, dofng, and disposal of personal protective equipment (PPE).
Two previous laboratory studies demonstrated persistence of infectious SARS-CoV-2
on numerous surfaces over extended periods; however, each of these studies evaluated
only a single set of indoor environmental conditions and used virus suspended in cell
culture media. Using 50 l of virus-containing droplets deposited onto nonporous
(copper, stainless steel, and plastic) and porous (cardboard) surfaces at 21 to 23C and
40% relative humidity (RH), van Doremalen et al. were able to show persistence of virus
on plastic and stainless steel for up to 72 h, whereas the durations of persistence on
cardboard (24 h) and copper (4 h) were much shorter (6). Chin et al. evaluated the
stability of 5-l droplets of SARS-CoV-2 deposited on several porous (paper, wood,
cloth, banknote, face mask) and nonporous (glass, stainless steel, and plastic) surfaces
at 22C and 65% RH. Infectious virus was detected on nonporous surfaces for 2 to
4 days, whereas stability on porous surfaces lasted 30 min to 2 days (7). Although these
initial studies provided valuable insights into the potential for fomite transmission in a
variety of contexts, it is difcult to fully interpret and generalize these results. First, the
previous studies did not assess the efciency of virus recovery from surfaces, and so
infectious decay cannot be separated from potential physical losses. Also, it is unclear
what degree of precision was achieved in maintaining temperature and RH in the prior
studies. More broadly, viral persistence under indoor conditions is complex and may be
driven by many factors, including surface type, temperature, relative humidity (RH), and
matrix (e.g., bodily uids) (812). Here, we report the rst analysis of the stability of
SARS-CoV-2 in simulated saliva, to represent a relevant clinical matrix (13, 14), using
droplets of various sizes deposited on surfaces and incubated under a range of
controlled temperature and RH conditions, thereby providing a more complete understanding of factors that inuence SARS-CoV-2 environmental persistence.
To determine the stability of SARS-CoV-2 on surfaces, virus was diluted 1:10 in
simulated saliva and droplets were deposited onto stainless steel, acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic, or nitrile rubber glove coupons. These surfaces were chosen
to represent two common sources of fomite transmission (door knobs/handles and
ofce electronics) and also to address the risks associated with contaminated PPE. Virus
stability was measured using multiple RH and temperature combinations ranging from
approximately 20 to 80% RH and 24 to 35C. Coupons were placed in an environmentally controlled testing plenum, which maintained RH and temperature set points with
low variability over a total of 32 trials. During each trial, virus was recovered from three
randomized coupons into culture medium at predetermined time points over a period
of 48 h. The amount of infectious virus remaining was determined using a quantitative
cell-based infection assay. Virus infectivity data collected over time were tted to
statistical models to estimate the infectivity decay rate and half-life (t1/2) for each set of
experimental conditions. A single coupon loaded with 0.1-m-diameter uorescently
labeled polystyrene latex microspheres was also collected at each time point, resuspended in buffer, and then evaluated for uorescence. These controls showed that
there was not a signicant decrease in uorescence over time (Fig. 1A), and the data
suggest that there was no signicant physical loss but that the reduction in virus titers
represented biological decay. In a subset of the trials (n  6), we also quantitated viral
RNA using reverse transcription quantitative real-time PCR (RT-qPCR) as a second
measure of physical losses but observed that its decay rate was dependent on both
temperature and humidity conditions and thus concluded that viral RNA could not be
used as a physical tracer (data not shown). Although this observation requires further
experimental validation, these data suggest that the utility of viral RNA for contamination surveillance may be confounded by environmental conditions.
Using virus deposited onto stainless steel coupons at ambient indoor temperature
(24C) and maintained using various levels of RH (20, 40, 60, and 80%), we found that
droplet size was not a signicant factor inuencing the half-life of SARS-CoV-2 (one-way
analysis of variance [ANOVA], P  0.39; Bartletts test, P  0.28); as a result, we did not
SARS-CoV-2 Surface Stability
FIG 1 Impact of droplet size, surface type, temperature, and relative humidity on SARS-CoV-2 decay. SARS-CoV-2 or uorescently
labeled polystyrene latex (PSL) beads were diluted 1:10 in simulated saliva, and then droplets (1, 5, or 50 l) were deposited onto
stainless steel (SS), acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic, or nitrile glove (NG) coupons and incubated within an environmentally
controlled chamber. During each experiment, three virus test coupons and one PSL bead coupon were chosen randomly at various
time points over a period of 48 h. Both virus and PSL beads were recovered by resuspension into culture medium and then either
quantied by a cell-based infectivity assay on Vero cells to determine the median tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50/ml) or assayed
for uorescence with a multimode plate reader. The mean half-life estimates (measured in hours) for SARS-CoV-2 in simulated saliva
under each set of conditions were derived from tting a generalized linear model with a normal distribution and identity link function
to infectivity data from each trial over time. (A) Representative data comparing SARS-CoV-2 infectivity (TCID50/ml) and PSL microsphere
relative uorescence units (RFU) across a range of temperature and RH conditions. Data from six of the trials are shown where 5-l
droplets were deposited onto stainless steel. Red horizontal dashed lines indicate the lower limit of detection for the TCID50 assay (0.2
log10 TCID50/ml). Error bars indicate standard deviations for each time point. (B) Estimated virus half-life on different surfaces from all
32 trials across a range of a droplet sizes, temperatures, and relative humidities. Individual half-life estimates are shown as points, and
the mean half-life value for each surface is indicated by a horizontal line. (C and D) Comparisons of virus half-life estimates among
various RH (20 to 80%) conditions (C) and temperature (24 and 35C) and RH (20 to 80%) conditions (D). Bars represent means of results
from each group, and error bars indicate standard deviations. Statistical signicance (P  0.05) is indicated by brackets and asterisks
(*). A one-way ANOVA and a Students t test were used to calculate the data presented in panels C and D, respectively.
further evaluate droplet size on ABS plastic or nitrile rubber. Comparison of levels of
virus decay determined from all 32 trials, which used a variety of volumes, temperatures
(24, 28, and 35C), and RH conditions, showed there was not a signicant difference in
half-life estimates between virus deposited on stainless steel, ABS plastic, or nitrile
Biryukov et al.
FIG 2 Temperature and humidity response model for SARS-CoV-2 decay. (A) Using empirically determined
estimates of SARS-CoV-2 half-life data collected under various temperature and RH conditions (24 to 35C, 20 to
60% RH), a regression analysis was performed to determine a predictive decay model. The equation shown, where
xT is temperature (C) and xRH is percent RH, can be used to estimate half-life (t1/2) (in hours) for SARS-CoV-2 on
stainless steel, ABS plastic, or nitrile glove rubber within the range of environmental conditions tested in this study.
Actual half-life data are plotted against predicted half-life estimates. The mean of all data is indicated by a
horizontal blue line. The regression t line is shown in red. The shaded region indicates the 95% condence interval
of the regression t line. RMSE, root mean square error. (B) Contour plot representing the predicted estimates of
SARS-CoV-2 half-life data in simulated saliva on stainless steel, ABS plastic, or nitrile rubber as a function of
temperature and RH.
glove coupons (one-way ANOVA, P  0.93; Bartletts test, P  0.26) (Fig. 1B). Based on
these comparisons, data from all trials were combined for subsequent analyses.
We estimated the mean half-life values in hours ( standard deviations [SD]) for RH
of 20% (t1/2  15.33  2.75), 40% (t1/2  11.52  1.72), 60% (t1/2  9.15  3.39), and
80% (t1/2  8.33  1.80) at 24C, with the results indicating that virus at ambient indoor
conditions at 24C performed using the Tukey-Kramer method found the half-life at
20% RH to be signicantly different from the half-life at both 60 and 80% RH
(P  0.0038 and P  0.0023, respectively). We also evaluated the effect of temperature
on the surface stability of SARS-CoV-2 (Fig. 1D). When temperature was increased from
24 to 35C, the higher temperature resulted in faster virus decay and shorter half-life at
20% RH (t1/2  7.33  1.33), 40% RH (t1/2  7.52  1.22), and 60% RH (t1/2 
2.26  1.42). Pairwise comparisons of mean half-life results between 24 and 35C under
each set of RH conditions (Students t test) demonstrated that these differences were
signicant (P  0.0016, 0.0327, and 0.0170, respectively). At 40% RH, virus decay was
also evaluated at 28C (t1/2  6.11  3.02) and found to be signicantly faster (Students
t test; P  0.0163). The combination of 35C and 80% RH could not be evaluated due
to test system limitations.
Analysis of estimated half-life data from 28 trials by two-way ANOVA demonstrated
that both temperature and RH were signicant factors inuencing virus decay
(P  0.0001 for both). Furthermore, we were able to t a linear regression equation
(adjusted R2  0.71) that models the half-life of SARS-CoV-2 in simulated saliva on
nonporous surfaces (stainless steel, ABS plastic, and nitrile rubber) (Fig. 2A). This model
can also be represented as a contour plot and used to estimate mean viral persistence
at any combination of temperature and RH conditions within the design space (i.e., 20
to 60% RH and 24 to 35C) (Fig. 2B). Trials performed at the 80% RH condition (n  4)
were not included in the model, as we were able to evaluate 80% RH only at 24C.
Although our data indicate that the virus half-life was inversely proportional to increasing temperature and RH, extrapolated estimates for conditions beyond those empirically tested may not be valid.
These data provide the rst evidence that increasing temperature and/or RH decreased how long SARS-CoV-2 remained infectious on two hard, nonporous surfaces
representative of commonly contaminated objects, suggesting that persistence and,
SARS-CoV-2 Surface Stability
ultimately, exposure risk may vary signicantly depending on environmental conditions. In addition, our data on virus stability on nitrile gloves serve as a reminder that
PPE, when used inappropriately, has the potential to be a source of contamination.
Although indoor temperatures can be effectively controlled by HVAC (heating,
ventilation, and air conditioning) systems, in the absence of active humidity control,
indoor RH is inuenced by outdoor weather conditions. The data shown here are most
relevant for indoor conditions as they do not address the signicant effect of solar
radiation upon virus decay (15). However, these data could be applied to virus decay on
surfaces under outdoor conditions at night when environmental conditions are within
the range tested in this study. These data can inform disinfection protocols for hospital
rooms or mobile COVID-19 treatment facilities, as environments with relatively low
humidity may warrant more frequent cleaning. Temporarily increasing temperature
and/or RH in these spaces once they are vacated may also complement cleaning with
chemical disinfectants to reduce the risk of potential fomite transmission.
While we have demonstrated the impact of RH and temperature on the stability of
SARS-CoV-2 on stainless steel and ABS plastic as representative nonporous surfaces, the
applicability of these results to porous surfaces (e.g., clothing, masks, cardboard packaging) is currently unknown and bears further investigation. In addition, data regarding
the amount of infectious virus present on surfaces in patient rooms are required in
order to determine how long such surfaces would remain a source of virus transmission. Finally, the infectious dose of SARS-CoV-2 is currently unknown and thus it is
difcult to evaluate the risk of infection following contact with a contaminated fomite.
Despite these caveats, these data can be used to determine how long it would take to
reduce levels of infectious virus on nonporous surfaces by a specic factor (e.g., 99.9%
reduction after 10  t1/2) under a wider range of environmental conditions than was
previously possible.
Cell culture. Vero (ATCC CCL-81) cells were used to propagate SARS-CoV-2 and in
virus microtitration assays. Cells were cultured at 37C and 5% CO2 in complete growth
medium (gMEM) as previously described (16). A ViaFill reagent dispenser (Integra
Biosciences Corp.) was utilized to seed cells into 96-well, clear-bottom plates for virus
microtitration assays. Cells were seeded at a density appropriate to achieve approximately conuent monolayers on the day of infection.
Virus stock production. SARS-CoV-2 isolate USA-WA1/2020 (NR-52281) was deposited by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and obtained through BEI
Resources, NIAID, NIH. This virus (passage 4) was propagated twice in Vero cells to yield
the working stocks (passage 6) that were used for this work. Briey, a volume of
2.4  106 Vero cells suspended in 30 ml of gMEM was combined with SARS-CoV-2 at a
multiplicity of infection equal to 0.01 and was then seeded into a T-150 ask and
incubated at 37C and 5% CO2. After 24 h, a suspension of 1.2  106 uninfected Vero
cells mixed in 0.5 ml gMEM was added to the infected cells. At 72 h postinfection, the
asks were frozen at  80C for at least 1 h and then thawed at 37C, and a cell scraper
was used to remove any remaining cells from the ask. The combination of the infected
cell lysate and culture supernatant was claried by centrifugation at 1,000  g for 10
min at 4C. Virus was aliquoted and stored at  80C prior to use in experiments. The
viral stocks were sequenced and found to match the consensus sequence previously
described (MN985325.1). All work with SARS-CoV-2 was performed under conditions of
biosafety level 3 containment.
Test matrix. SARS-CoV-2 was diluted 1:10 in simulated saliva to approximate the
behavior of virus in a relevant bodily uid. Simulated saliva was prepared according to
and found to be similar to that described in previous reports (17, 18). The pH was
measured using a SevenExcellence pH meter (Mettler-Toledo). Surface tension was
measured at settings of both 15 and 750 ms on a SITA pro line t15 bubble pressure
Biryukov et al.
TABLE 1 Composition of simulated saliva
MgCl2  6 H2O
CaCl2  H2O
Distilled water
To volume
porcine gastric mucin type III (Millipore Sigma).
tensiometer (SITA Process Solutions). Viscosity was measured using a SV-1A tuning fork
vibro viscometer (A&D Company, Ltd.). Percentages of solids were analyzed using a
MA35 infrared moisture analyzer (Sartorius). To quantify protein content, a Pierce
bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientic; catalog no. 23225)
was used with an albumin standard, and tests were read on a SpectraMax M5 plate
reader (Molecular Devices). Simulated saliva was stored at 4C for up to 2 weeks prior
to use in experiments.
Surface decay test system. To determine the biological decay rate (i.e., loss of
infectivity) of SARS-CoV-2 on stainless steel or plastic, virus-laden wet droplets were
deposited onto coupons, which were then incubated under various RH and temperature conditions, followed by recovery of virus from the coupons for microtitration
infectivity assays. For each test performed on either grade 304 stainless steel (Diamond
Perforated Metals) or ABS plastic, sterilized 19-mm-diameter circular coupons were
loaded with 1, 5, or 50 l of SARS-CoV-2 diluted 1:10 in simulated saliva. For each test
performed on nitrile gloves, a 0.25-in. square cut from nitrile gloves was placed on a
stainless steel coupon and loaded with 5 l of SARS-CoV-2 diluted 1:10 in simulated
saliva. The coupons were immediately placed into a custom 20-port temperature- and
relative humidity-controlled plenum supplied with constant airow at 5 liters/min.
Humidity control was performed by mixing streams of HEPA-ltered dry and humidied
air with mass ow controllers (Alicat Scientic). Humid air was generated by circulating
ultrapure water through Naon gas humidication bundles (Perma Pure). For temperatures in the range of 24C, the plenum was equilibrated to room temperature. For
temperatures outside this range, the plenum temperature was controlled by circulating
a sealed loop of chilled or heated water around the plenum. Temperature and RH were
monitored continuously via temperature/RH probes inserted directly into the plenum
(Vaisala), and data were collected with either LabVIEW (National Instruments) or Vaisala
Insight PC software. During the experiments, temperature uctuated 2C and RH (20,
40, 60, or 80%) was controlled at 10%. In each experiment, the initial virus titer was
determined by immediately placing virus-laden coupons into 4 ml gMEM, vortex mixing
for 30 s at 2,400 rpm, and then quantifying infectivity via microtitration assay as
described below. To control for physical efciency and sample extraction, 0.1-mdiameter green uorescent polystyrene latex microspheres (Thermo Fisher Scientic;
TABLE 2 Characterization of simulated saliva
Protein concn
Surface tension (15 ms)
Surface tension (750 ms)
SARS-CoV-2 Surface Stability
catalog no. G100B) diluted 1:1 in gMEM were spotted onto coupons (1, 5, or 50 l),
incubated in the test plenum with the virus-laden coupons, and recovered as described
for the virus, and uorescence (expressed in relative uorescence units [RFU]) was
measured on a GloMax luminometer (Promega). Viral RNA was quantied (as described
below) in a subset of the samples. All coupons were processed identically at 0.75-, 3-,
9-, 24-, and 48-h time points.
Virus microtitration assay. Virus containing samples were serially diluted (101
through 104) in 96-well, clear-bottom plates containing conuent monolayers of Vero
cells. For each dilution, a total of 10 replicate wells were infected. The infected plates
were incubated at 37C and 5% CO2 for 4 days, and then individual wells were visually
inspected using a Nikon TS100 microscope for the presence of virus-induced cytopathic
effects (CPE) at each dilution compared to a negative (medium only) control. The
median 50% tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50) was estimated for each of the
samples using the Spearman-Karber method (19, 20).
Viral nucleic acid quantication. SARS-CoV-2 RNA was quantied by a reverse
transcription quantitative real-time PCR (RT-qPCR) assay using an Applied Biosystems
7500 Fast real-time PCR instrument and SuperScript III one-step RT-PCR MasterMix with
Platinum Taq DNA polymerase. The target of the PCR assay is a conserved region of the
viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) gene. Briey, viral RNA from test samples
was isolated and puried using the Qiagen Viral RNA Mini Kit centrifugation protocol
per the manufacturers instructions. The PCR master mix was composed of sterile,
molecular biology-grade water, 1 SuperScript reaction mix, 1 SuperScript reverse
transcriptase, 0.2 M forward and reverse primers, and 0.1 M 6-carboxyuorescein
(FAM)-labeled uorescent probe. The primers and probe were based on primer and
replace the redundant bases with consensus bases. Reaction plates were set up by
combining 5 l of RNA and 15 l of PCR master mix per well. Each plate also had a
7-point standard curve based on a synthetic DNA positive control representing the
assays target amplicon (gBlocks; Integrated DNA Technologies). Cycling conditions
were run as follows: hold for 50C for 30 min, 95C for 10 min, and then 40 cycles of 95C
for 15 s and 60C for 1 min. Quantication was determined by the number of cycles
required to cross a threshold of 0.02 (values reported as threshold cycles [CT]). Data
representing numbers of viral RNA copies present in test samples per milliliter were
interpolated from the standard curves.
Design of experiments. Trials performed on both stainless steel and ABS plastic
encompassed a complete design space that included 5-l droplets incubated at 24C
(20, 40, 60, and 80% RH), 28C (40% RH), and 35C (20, 40, and 60% RH). On stainless
steel, additional trials were performed using 1-l and 50-l droplets at 24C (20, 40, 60,
and 80% RH). For analyses using nitrile glove rubber, a reduced design space was
utilized that permitted comparison between surface types, and trials were performed at
24C (20 and 60% RH) and 35C (20 and 60% RH).
Statistical analysis. ANOVA was used to compare the effects of droplet size and
surface on the decay half-life. Bartletts test was used to show that there was no
statistical difference in half-life variance across the droplet size or surface type data.
Analysis of the data indicated that virus decay was biphasic and was related to the
drying time of virus-containing droplets. Thus, each data set was divided into a wet
phase and a dry phase. For 20, 40, and 60% RH, the wet phase was dened from time
point 0 to 0.75 h and the dry phase was from time point 0.75 h to 48 h. For 80% RH,
the wet phase was dened from time point 0 to 3 h and the dry phase was from time
point 3 h to 48 h. These estimates were based on observations of droplet drying during
experiments as well as on RH data collected from the surface test decay system (data
not shown).
A logarithm (base 10) transformation was applied to the TCID50 data, and a linear
model was tted using MATLABs FITGLM with an identify link function and a normal
Biryukov et al.
distribution. Points that were below the assays limit of detection (0.2 log10 TCID50/ml)
were removed from the analysis. The half-life (t1/2) was also determined as follows:
Regression analysis was applied to determine the dependence of the virus half-life
on temperature and relative humidity. The following model was initially assumed
where xT represents temperature in degrees Celsius, xRH represents percent relative
humidity, and the  terms represent coefcients:
t12xT, xRH  0  1xT  2xRH  3xTxRH  4xT2  5xRH
Stepwise regression (MATLAB STEPWISELM.M) was then used to identify and remove
predictors that were insignicant using a backward elimination approach. The stepwise
procedure starts with the full model and then measures the contribution of each predictor
to the residual sum of squared errors (SSE) using an F-test on the ratio of the SSE with and
without that predictor; the most statistically insignicant predictor (if there is one) is then
removed, and the process is repeated until no further predictors can be removed without
a statistically signicant loss in the SSE. After determining the model, an F-test was
performed to conrm that the model provided a better t than an intercept-only model.
The tted residuals were then analyzed to verify the absence of any apparent structure, and
the Shapiro-Wilke test was used to verify residual normality. The nal model for the decay
of SARS-CoV-2 on stainless steel, ABS plastic, and nitrile rubber as a function of temperature
in degrees Celsius and percent relative humidity is as follows:
t12xT, xRH  32.426272  0.622108xT  0.153707xRH
It should be noted that this model is valid for the range of conditions tested;
extrapolation outside the range of temperature and relative humidity values tested is
not advised and should be done with caution.
Data visualization. GraphPad Prism version 8.4 was used to generate graphs. JMP
Genomics version 9.1 was used to prepare a contour plot of half-life versus temperature
and RH.
We recognize all members of the National Biological Threat Characterization Center
and the many NBACC staff members who assisted in the SARS-CoV-2 work or supported
laboratory operations during this time. Staff members of the National Bioforensic
Analysis Center were instrumental in providing early support in virus propagation and
also in sequencing virus stocks. Finally, we also thank the members of the Department
of Homeland Security (DHS) Science and Technology (S&T) Probabilistic Analysis of
National Threats Hazards and Risks (PANTHR) team (Matthew Moe, Lloyd Hough, Justin
Taylor, Elizabeth Lapatovich, and Kelly Johnston).
This work was funded under agreement no. HSHQDC-15-C-00064 awarded to Battelle
operation of the NBACC, a federally funded research and development center.
The views and conclusions contained in this document are ours and should not be
interpreted as necessarily representing the ofcial policies, either expressed or implied,
services mentioned in this presentation. In no event shall the DHS, BNBI, or NBACC have
any responsibility or liability for any use of, misuse of, inability to use, or reliance upon
the information presented here.
1. Chia PY, Coleman KK, Tan YK, Ong SWX, Gum M, Lau SK, Lim XF, Lim AS,
Sutjipto S, Lee PH, Son TT, Young BE, Milton DK, Gray GC, Schuster S,
Barkham T, De PP, Vasoo S, Chan M, Ang BSP, Tan BH, Leo YS, Ng OT,
Wong MSY, Marimuthu K, Singapore Novel Coronavirus Outbreak Research Team. 2020. Detection of air and surface contamination by
SARS-CoV-2 in hospital rooms of infected patients. Nat Commun 11:
2. Guo Z-D, Wang Z-Y, Zhang S-F, Li X, Li L, Li C, Cui Y, Fu R-B, Dong Y-Z,
Chi X-Y, Zhang M-Y, Liu K, Cao C, Liu B, Zhang K, Gao Y-W, Lu B, Chen W.
2020. Aerosol and surface distribution of severe acute respiratory synmsphere.asm.org 8
SARS-CoV-2 Surface Stability
13. To KK, Tsang OT, Leung WS, Tam AR, Wu TC, Lung DC, Yip CC, Cai JP,
Chan JM, Chik TS, Lau DP, Choi CY, Chen LL, Chan WM, Chan KH, Ip JD,
Ng AC, Poon RW, Luo CT, Cheng VC, Chan JF, Hung IF, Chen Z, Chen H,
Yuen KY. 2020. Temporal proles of viral load in posterior oropharyngeal
saliva samples and serum antibody responses during infection by SARSCoV-2: an observational cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis 20:565574.
14. Chau NVV, Thanh Lam V, Thanh Dung N, Yen LM, Minh NNQ, Hung LM,
Ngoc NM, Dung NT, Man DNH, Nguyet LA, Nhat LTH, Nhu LNT, Ny NTH,
Hong NTT, Kestelyn E, Dung NTP, Xuan TC, Hien TT, Thanh Phong N, Tu
TNH, Geskus RB, Thanh TT, Thanh Truong N, Binh NT, Thuong TC,
Thwaites G, Tan LV, OUCRU COVID-19 research group. 2020. The natural
15. Ratnesar-Shumate S, Williams G, Green B, Krause M, Holland B, Wood S,
Bohannon J, Boydston J, Freeburger D, Hooper I, Beck K, Yeager J,
Altamura LA, Biryukov J, Yolitz J, Schuit M, Wahl V, Hevey M, Dabisch P.
2020. Simulated sunlight rapidly inactivates SARS-CoV-2 on surfaces. J
16. Schuit M, Gardner S, Wood S, Bower K, Williams G, Freeburger D, Dabisch
P. 2020. The inuence of simulated sunlight on the inactivation of
17. Woo MH, Hsu YM, Wu CY, Heimbuch B, Wander J. 2010. Method for
contamination of ltering facepiece respirators by deposition of MS2
18. Zuo Z, Kuehn TH, Bekele AZ, Mor SK, Verma H, Goyal SM, Raynor PC, Pui
19. Karber G. 1931. Beitrag zur kollektiven Behandlung pharmakologischer
20. Spearman C. 1908. The method of right and wrong cases (constant
21. Corman V, Bleicker T, Brunink S, Drosten C, Landt O, Koopmans M, Peiris
?sfvrsna9ef618c_2. Accessed 8 May 2020.
drome coronavirus 2 in hospital wards, Wuhan, China, 2020. Emerg
Ong SWX, Tan YK, Chia PY, Lee TH, Ng OT, Wong MSY, Marimuthu K. 2020.
Air, surface environmental, and personal protective equipment contamination by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) from
Wu S, Wang Y, Jin X, Tian J, Liu J, Mao Y. 2020. Environmental contamination by SARS-CoV-2 in a designated hospital for coronavirus disease
Ye G, Lin H, Chen L, Wang S, Zeng Z, Wang W, Zhang S, Rebmann T, Li
Y, Pan Z, Yang Z, Wang Y, Wang F, Min Qian Z, Wang X. 2020. Environmental contamination of SARS-CoV-2 in healthcare premises. J Infect
van Doremalen N, Bushmaker T, Morris DH, Holbrook MG, Gamble A,
Williamson BN, Tamin A, Harcourt JL, Thornburg NJ, Gerber SI, LloydSmith JO, de Wit E, Munster VJ. 2020. Aerosol and surface stability of
SARS-CoV-2 as compared with SARS-CoV-1. N Engl J Med 382:
Chin AWH, Chu JTS, Perera MRA, Hui KPY, Yen H-L, Chan MCW, Peiris M,
Casanova LM, Jeon S, Rutala WA, Weber DJ, Sobsey MD. 2010. Effects of
van Doremalen N, Bushmaker T, Munster VJ. 2013. Stability of Middle
Kampf G, Todt D, Pfaender S, Steinmann E. 2020. Persistence of coronaviruses on inanimate surfaces and their inactivation with biocidal agents.
Chan KH, Peiris JS, Lam SY, Poon LL, Yuen KY, Seto WH. 2011. The effects of
temperature and relative humidity on the viability of the SARS coronavirus.
Schuit M, Miller DM, Reddick-Elick MS, Wlazlowski CB, Filone CM, Herzog
A, Colf LA, Wahl-Jensen V, Hevey M, Noah JW. 2016. Differences in the
comparative stability of Ebola virus Makona-C05 and Yambuku-Mayinga
