Predictions, role of interventions and effects of a historic
national lockdown in Indias response to the COVID-19
pandemic: data science call to arms
Debashree Ray1,2,*, Maxwell Salvatore3,4,*, Rupam Bhattacharyya3, Lili Wang3, Jiacong
Du3,4, Shariq Mohammed3,5, Soumik Purkayastha3, Aritra Halder6, Alexander Rix3,4, Daniel
Barker3, Michael Kleinsasser3, Yiwang Zhou3, Debraj Bose3, Peter Song3, Mousumi
Banerjee3,8, Veerabhadran Baladandayuthapani3, Parikshit Ghosh7, Bhramar
With only 536 cases and 11 fatalities, India took the historic decision of a 21-day national
lockdown on March 25. The lockdown was first extended to May 3 soon after the analysis of this
paper was completed, and then to May 18 while this paper was being revised. In this paper, we use
a Bayesian extension of the Susceptible-Infected-Removed (eSIR) model designed for intervention
forecasting to study the short- and long-term impact of an initial 21-day lockdown on the total
number of COVID-19 infections in India compared to other less severe non-pharmaceutical
interventions. We compare effects of hypothetical durations of lockdown on reducing the number
of active and new infections. We find that the lockdown, if implemented correctly, can reduce the
total number of cases in the short term, and buy India invaluable time to prepare its healthcare and
disease-monitoring system. Our analysis shows we need to have some measures of suppression in
place after the lockdown for increased benefit (as measured by reduction in the number of cases).
A longer lockdown between 4256 days is preferable to substantially flatten the curve when
J.D., S.M. and S.P. analyzed the data. B.M. participated in funding acquisition, investigation and provided resources. L.W., P.S. and
B.M. developed the methodology. M.S. and B.M. administered the project. M.S., A.R., D.B. and M.K. created the software/app. M.B.,
V.B., P.G. and B.M. supervised the study. D.R., M.S., R.B., L.W., A.R., M.K. and B.M. helped in the visualization. D.R., M.S., R.B.,
Ray et al.
compared to 2128 days of lockdown. Our models focus solely on projecting the number of
COVID-19 infections and, thus, inform policymakers about one aspect of this multi-faceted
decision-making problem. We conclude with a discussion on the pivotal role of increased testing,
reliable and transparent data, proper uncertainty quantification, accurate interpretation of
forecasting models, reproducible data science methods and tools that can enable data-driven
policymaking during a pandemic. Our software products are available at covind19.org.
Basic reproduction number; Coronavirus; Credible interval; India; Intervention forecasting; SIR
Four months since the first case of COVID-19 in Wuhan, China, the SARS-CoV-2 virus has
engulfed the world and has been declared a global pandemic (WHO Director-Generals
Opening Remarks at the Media Briefing on COVID-19  11 March 2020, 2020). The
number of confirmed cases worldwide stands at a staggering 1,930,780 (as of 9:20 AM EST
April 14, 2020, Microsoft bing coronavirus tracker (Microsoft bing COVID-19 tracker)). Of
a population of 1.34 billion (compare China at 1.39 billion and USA at 325.7 million)
(World Bank). India has been vigilant and early in instituting strong public health
interventions including sealing the borders with travel ban/canceling almost all visas, closing
March 24, India took the historic decision of a 21-day national lockdown starting March 25,
when it had reported only 536 COVID-19 cases and 11 fatalities. In the subsequent days, we
have seen a steady growth in the number of new cases and fatalities, with growth rates
slower than other affected countries but in 21 days, the curve has not yet turned the corner
forecasting models in this paper use data up to April 14 with the premise of a 21-day
lockdown in place. The lockdown was further extended to May 3, soon after the analysis of
this paper was completed. The lockdown was again extended to May 18 while this paper was
being revised, thus entailing almost an 8-week lockdown period.
While India seems to have done relatively well in controlling the number of confirmed cases
missing or unknown component in this assessment: The number of truly affected cases,
which depends on the extent of testing, the accuracy of the test results and, in particular, the
frequency and scale of testing of asymptomatic cases who may have been exposed. The
frequency of testing has been low in India. According to the Indian Council of Medical
Research (ICMR), only 229,426 subjects have been tested as of April 14 (<0.03% of the
population) (Indian Council of Medical Research, 2020). When there is no approved vaccine
or drug for treating COVID-19, entering phase 2 or phase 3 of escalation will have
devastating consequences on both the already overstretched healthcare system of India, and
Ray et al.
US or Italy, COVID-19 enters gradually and then explodes suddenly.
reference. The estimated capacity of hospital beds in India is 70 per 100,000 (Hospital Beds
(per 1,000 People), 2020), which is an upper bound on treatment capacity. Given an average
occupancy rate of 75%, only a quarter of these are available (Sindhu et al. 2019). Moreover,
critically ill COVID-19 patients (about 510% of those infected) will require ICU beds and
ventilator support. India has only 3558 thousand ICU beds with very high occupancy rates
and at most 1 ventilator per 2 ICU beds (Times of India). In order to roll out interventions
and plan for healthcare infrastructure, robust projection models for outcomes of interest are
necessary. There are many outcomes that are of potential interest to policymakers; for
example: how many infected cases will be hospitalized? How many will be admitted to the
ICU? How many patients will need ventilators? And, finally, what will be the mortality due
to COVID-19 infections? We focus on the number of active cases as our target of prediction
due to the limited data from India on the other outcomes. From other nations we know that
roughly 20% of infections will probably need hospitalization (Root, 2020) and 5% will need
ICU admission (Guan et al., 2020), and case-fatality rates vary between 15% (Oke &
Henegan, 2020). This may provide crude estimates of other outcomes from case-count
analyze the COVID-19 case-count data from India. The approaches for modeling the disease
transmission and then forecasting the number of cases at a future time can be broadly
categorized into two genres: exponential/Poisson type models, and compartmental
epidemiologic models. For instance, Ranjan (2020) and Gupta and Shankar (2020) used the
classical exponential model, S. Das (2020) used a Poisson regression model while Deb and
Majumdar (2020) used an auto-regressive moving average model to analyze incidence
pattern over time. The compartmental epidemiologic models include variations of the
susceptible-infected-removed (SIR) model, which is guided by a set of differential equations
relating the number of susceptible people, the number of infected people (cases) and the
number of people who have been removed (either recovered or dead) at any given time. This
simple SIR model has been used by Ranjan (2020) and Dhanwant and Ramanathan (2020).
Singh and Adhikari (2020) used an age-structured SIR and social contact model, where an
SIR model is assumed in each age category. Another extension of the SIR model is the SEIR
model that incorporates an additional compartment of truly exposed people that is a latent
variable. Mandal et al. (2020), Chatterjee et al. (2020), Sardar et al. (2020) and Senapati et
al. (2020) used one or the other variation of the SEIR model. For example, Sardar et al.
(2020) used an extra compartment for lockdown to capture in-home isolation and study the
these existing models for India.
primary forecasting objectives: (a) Forecasting future case-counts (short term and long term)
with different forms of suppression measures in place (post lockdown) (b) Studying the
Ray et al.
relative impact of length/duration of a lockdown on our predictions of cumulative
COVID-19 infections. We carry out extensive sensitivity analysis to assess the robustness of
our forecasting models. We conclude with a discussion regarding the need for reliable casecount data, increased testing, the importance of uncertainty quantification of the projected
case-counts, and transparent data science methods that can inform and influence
Medium studying pre (Ray et al., 2020), during (Salvatore, Wang, et al., 2020) and post
(Salvatore, Ray, et al., 2020) lockdown effects, providing critical information for
policymakers and having an extensive reach (Reuters (Ghosal, 2020), Times of India (P. Das,
2020), The Guardian (Ellis-Petersen, 2020), The Economic Times (Noronha, 2020)), an
interactive and dynamic RShiny app that daily updates forecasts as new case counts are
reported, and publicly available codes for reproducible research.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the structure of the
eSIR model, our parameter choices and the Bayesian computational algorithm. In Section 3
we present results from analyzing the data from India that include a sensitivity analysis. We
assess how our forecasting model updates itself with more accrual of data over time. In
Section 4 we provide an itemized discussion of some of the salient data and data science
issues related to intervention forecasting and case-count projections. Section 5 presents a
brief conclusion.
Methods and Notation
Study design and data source
We used the current daily data on number of COVID-19 infected cases, recoveries and
deaths in India to predict the number of infected and removed cases at any given time (L.
Wang et al., 2020). We obtained the data (up to April 14) from the 2019 Novel Coronavirus
Engineering (JHU CSSE) and from covid19india.org (covid19india, 2020; Dong et al., 2020;
Our statistical model for predictions
OverviewThe standard SIR model was recently extended to incorporate time-varying
transmission rates or time-varying quarantine protocols and is known as the extended SIR
(eSIR) model (L. Wang et al., 2020). When using the eSIR model with time-varying disease
transmission rate, it can depict a series of time-varying changes caused by either external
variation like government-initiated macro isolation measures, community-level protective
measures and environment changes, or internal variations like mutations and evolutions of
the pathogen. To implement the eSIR model, a Bayesian hierarchical framework is assumed.
Using the current time series data on the proportions of infected and the removed people, a
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) implementation of this Bayesian model provides not
only posterior estimation of parameters and prevalence of all the three compartments in the
SIR model, but also predicted proportions of the infected and the removed people at future
Ray et al.
time points. The R package for implementing this general model for understanding disease
Mathematical framework of the eSIR modelThe eSIR model works by assuming
that the true underlying probabilities of the three compartments follow a latent Markov
transition process, and that we observe only the daily proportions of infected cases and
removed cases. First, let us establish some notation. Assume that the observed proportions of
infected and removed cases on day t are denoted by Y tI and Y tR, respectively. Further, denote
the true underlying probabilities of the S, I, and R compartments on day t by tS, tI , and tR,
respectively, and assume that for any t, tS + tI + tR = 1. Assuming a usual SIR model on the
Here,  > 0 denotes the disease transmission rate, and  > 0 denotes the removal rate. The
basic reproduction number R0 : =
indicates the expected number of cases generated by one
infected case in the absence of any intervention and assuming that the whole population is
susceptible. At this stage, for the observed infected and removed proportions, we assume a
Beta-Dirichlet state-space model, independent conditionally on the underlying process:
Y tI t,   Beta I tI , I 1  tI ,
Y tR t,   Beta RtR, R 1  tR .
Further, the Markov process on the latent proportions is built as:
where t denotes the vector of the underlying population probabilities of the three
compartments, whose mean is modeled as an unknown function of the probability vector
from the previous time point, along with the transition parameters;  = , , 0T , ,  denotes
the whole set of parameters where I, R and  are parameters controlling variability of the
observation and latent process, respectively. The function f(.) is then solved as the mean
transition probability determined by the SIR dynamical system, using a fourth order RungeKutta approximation.
Priors and the MCMC algorithm setup of the eSIR modelThe prior on the initial
vector of latent probabilities is set as 0  Diriclet 1  Y 1I  Y 1R, Y 1I , Y 1R , 0S = 1  0I  0R.
The prior distribution of the basic reproduction number is R0 ~ LogNormal(0.582,0.223) so
Ray et al.
that E(R0) = 2 and SD(R0) = 1, where E and SD denote the mean and standard deviation
respectively. The prior distribution of the removal rate is  ~ LogNormal(2.955,0.910) so
that E() = 0.082 and SD() = 0.1. The prior mean of the removal rate  indicates an
average infectious period of 12 days, which is originally set using estimates from the SARS
outbreak in Hong Kong (Mkhatshwa & Mummert, 2010) due to the similarity between the
two viruses; this value also aligns well with several recent studies on COVID-19 in China
(Chen et al. 2020; Li et al., 2020; Ryu & Chun, 2020). The prior mean of the basic
reproduction number, 2.0, is approximately the average of estimates from many other
COVID-19 studies on the Indian population (S. Das, 2020; Deb & Majumdar, 2020; Ranjan,
2020; Sardar et al., 2020; Singh & Adhikari, 2020). We have conducted sensitivity analysis
to evaluate how robust the model is towards the prior settings using Indian population
COVID-19 data. The sensitivity issue can be minimized with more observed data of longer
exponentially increasing period and stronger intensities by focusing on cities or states that
are highly exposed. Note that the prior mean of the distribution of the transmission rate 
equals R0. For the variability parameters, the default choice is to set large variances in both
observed and latent processes, which may be adjusted over the course of the epidemic with
more data becoming available:
, I , R  iid Gamma(2, 0.0001) .
Denoting t0 as the last date of data availability, and assuming that the forecast spans over the
period [t0 + 1, T], our algorithm is as follows.
0. Take M draws from the posterior 1: t0,  | Y 1: t0 .
1. For each solution path m  {1,  , M}, iterate between the following two steps via
Draw t(m) from t | t  1 ,  (m) , t  t0 + 1, , T .
Draw Y t(m) from Y t | t(m),  (m) , t  t0 + 1, , T .
Modeling interventionWe model the effect of interventions by assuming that the
intervention will result in a decrease in the transmission from the S compartment to the I
compartment. We do so by decreasing the effective rate of transition (or, equivalently, the
chance of interaction between members of S and I), by introducing a time-varying
transmission rate modifier (t) +  [0,1]. This updates the flow between the three
Ray et al.
The reproductivity is, thus, modified by the intervention over time as R0(t). To better
understand the introduction of this effect modifier, we follow an example given by L. Wang
et al. (2020). Suppose at a time t, qs(t)  [0,1] is the chance of an at-risk person being in
home isolation, and qI(t)  [0,1] is the chance of an infected person being in hospital
quarantine. Consequently, the chance of disease transmission when an at-risk person meets
an infected person is  1  qS(t) tS 1  qI(t) tI : =  (t)tStI , with
(t): = 1  qS(t) 1  qI(t)  [0, 1]. In effect, this (t) modifies the chance of a susceptible
person meeting with an infected person which is termed as a transmission modifier. In this
steadily increased community-level awareness and responsible quarantine and preventive
measures, and the country-wide lockdown measures initiated by the government. This
predefined transmission modifier can be smoothly incorporated into the differential
equations as well as the MCMC algorithms. Its functional form can be quite flexible in
reflecting the changing pattern of human intervention that affects the transmission rate of the
epidemic within the population.
Implementation of the eSIR modelWe implemented the proposed algorithm in R
package rjags (Plummer et al.) and the differential equations were solved via a fourth-order
RungeKutta approximation. To ensure quality of the MCMC, we set the adaptation number
to be 104, thinned the chain by keeping one draw from every 10 random draws to reduce
autocorrelation, set a burnin period of 105 draws to let the chain stabilize, and starting from
4 separate chains. Thus, in total, we have 2105 effective draws with about 2106 draws
discarded. One could reduce the computation time, but consequently might risk the quality
of data. This implementation provides not only posterior estimation on parameters and
prevalence of all three compartments in the SIR model, but also predicted proportions of the
infected and the removed cases at future time points. To obtain predicted case-counts from
the predicted prevalence, we used 1.34 billion as the population of India, thus treating the
country as a homogeneous system for the outbreak (The World Bank).
Uncertainty QuantificationOne major advantage of a Bayesian implementation is that
uncertainty associated with all parameters and functions of parameters can be calculated
from exact posterior draws without relying on large-scale approximation or the delta
method. The credible intervals (CrI) for the prevalence are computed using the posterior
distribution of proportions given the observed confirmed and removed prevalence, i.e.,
Y t + 1 : T | Y 1:
t0, Y 1: t0 and Y t0 + 1 : T | Y 1: t0, Y 1: t0, where t0 denotes the last observed date,
and T denotes the last forecast date.
More specifically, suppose we want to compute the 95% posterior CrI for the observed
proportion of confirmed cases on the first day of forecast, i.e., a CrI for the random variable
Y tI0 + 1. Then, from the M solution paths of the posterior, we have the draws
Y t + 1, 1  m  M . We construct a 95% posterior CrI for Y tI0 + 1 by simply computing the
2.5th upper and lower percentiles from this set of M draws. The cumulative prevalences are
sums of the draws from the I and R compartments at a given time and thus the confidence
Ray et al.
interval for the sum can be calculated in a similar way. Case-counts can be obtained from
prevalences by using population size. Similar techniques apply to tI0 + j for any 1  j  T  t0
and transmission parameters like  and . For instance, a 95% posterior CrI for  can be
constructed by calculating the 2.5th upper and lower percentiles of {(m), 1  m  M}.
Therefore, we could simply define R(m) =
 1  m  M,
and compute the 95% posterior
CrI for the effective reproduction number R from {(m), 1  m  M}.
Parameter choices for short-term forecasts
We made projections of the cumulative number of cases over a time horizon to assess the
short-term impact of lockdown as well as the long-term impact of lockdown and postlockdown activities. For the short-term forecast on April 30, we assumed lockdown is
implemented until April 14 with either a 1- or a 2-week delay in peoples adherence/
compliance to lockdown restrictions. We compared these projections with two hypothetical
scenarios: (A) no non-pharmaceutical intervention (i.e., a constant disease transmission rate
over time since the first case was reported in India), (B) a moderate intervention with social
distancing and travel bans only (i.e., a decreased transmission rate compared to no
intervention). The prior mean for R0 (the expected number of cases generated by one
infected person assuming that the whole population is susceptible) was set at 2.0. This was
estimated based on the early phase data in India and is consistent with other models (S. Das,
2020; Deb & Majumdar, 2020; Ranjan, 2020; Sardar et al., 2020; Singh & Adhikari, 2020).
For the no intervention and the moderate intervention scenarios, we chose the transmission
rate and the removal rate such that the means for the prior distribution of the basic
reproductive number R0 are 2.0 and 1.5 respectively (SD=1). The change in R0 from 2.0 to
1.5 as an effect of intervention was created based on what we saw regarding the effect of
interventions and the relative reduction of R0 in Wuhan (C. Wang et al., 2020). Given the
similar population size and comparable population densities in China and India, the
assumption on similar effect of interventions on the pandemic across the two countries does
not seem too restrictive. For the current scenario of lockdown, our chosen mean for the prior
of R0 starts with 2.0 during the period of no intervention, drops to 75% of its original value
or 1.5 during the period of moderate intervention, and further drops to 0.8 during the 21-day
(assuming a gradual, moderate resumption of daily activities). The drop in R0 from 2.0 to
0.8 during lockdown represents a 60% reduction, which is proportionally slightly less than
the ~65% drop estimated in R0 from the COVID-19 outbreak in Wuhan following the
introduction of cordon sanitaire (Lin, 2020; Pan et al., 2020).
Parameter choices for long-term forecasts
For the longer-term forecast until June 15, we considered three hypothetical post-lockdown
scenarios: (i) people return to normal activities due to the urgent desire for reconnecting
after lockdown; (ii) people return to moderate activities as they did during the period with
social distancing and travel ban intervention; and (iii) people make a cautious return out of
fear for the coronavirus and partake in subdued activities. For these three scenarios, we
assume the prior mean on R0 moves back up from 0.8 to 2.0, 1.5 and 1.2 respectively three
Ray et al.
weeks after lockdown ends on April 14. We compared these post-lockdown scenarios with
another hypothetical scenario involving perpetual social distancing and travel ban without
any lockdown (we fixed the prior mean on R0 at 1.5 over the entire forecasting interval). The
Parameter choices for duration of lockdown analysis
To assess the long-term impact of lockdown duration, we considered four scenarios: 21-,
28-, 42, and 56-day lockdown periods. In all scenarios, we assume the prior mean on R0
remains at 0.8 for the duration of the lockdown. Post-lockdown, the prior mean on R0
gradually returns to a value of 1.5 over a span of three weeks (analogous to the moderate
return scenario). The changes to R0 values across our simulation scenarios for studying
Open-source software
We are committed to data transparency and reproducible research. Daily updates of our India
projections, based on cases, recovered and deaths reported the day before by
covid19india.org, a crowd-sourced database using state bulletins and official handles, can be
found in our interactive and dynamic Shiny app (covind19.org). Apart from the scenarios
with quantification of uncertainties. Open source code underlying this app are available at
As we interpret the results from our model, let us use caution in not over-interpreting the
numbers. Any statistical model is wrinkled with many assumptions. Similarly, the
predictions themselves have large uncertainty (as reflected by the large upper credible
limits). A rigorous quantitative treatment often allows us to analyze a problem with clarity
and objectivity, but we recommend focusing more on the qualitative takeaway messages
from this exercise rather than concentrating on the exact numerical projections or quoting
them with certainty.
Short-term forecast of cumulative case counts in India
Under national lockdown (March 25  April 14), our predicted cumulative number of
COVID-19 cases in India on April 30 are 19,625 and 19,503 (upper 95% CrI 130,326 and
129,422) assuming a 1- or 2-week delay (i.e., either a quick or a slow adherence),
respectively, in peoples adherence to lockdown restrictions and a gradual, moderate
the predicted cumulative number of cases under no intervention and the intervention
involving social distancing and travel bans without lockdown are 222 thousand and 53
thousand (upper 95% CrI of nearly 1.4 million and 0.3 million) respectively. Under quick
lockdown with moderate return compared to no intervention and social distancing and
travel ban. The relative reduction in cases between two scenarios (often from the least to
Ray et al.
the most intense intervention) is calculated as the difference between an estimate (on a
particular day, e.g., April 30) under the social distancing and travel ban scenario and under
the lockdown with moderate return scenario and then divided by the estimate under the
social distancing and travel ban scenario.
We are reporting only the upper credible limit here and elsewhere since the lower credible
limits are very small and uninformative due to the large uncertainty in our predictions arising
from many unknowns. We also believe that our point estimates are at best underestimates
due to potential surveillance bias (under-reporting and/or misdiagnosis of case-counts) and
our model not taking into account the population density, age-sex composition and regional
contact network structure of the whole nation. Increase in testing and community
transmission may lead to a spike in a single day and that may increase the projections
substantially upward. Regardless of the exact numbers it is clear that the 21-day lockdown
will likely have a strong relative effect on reducing the predicted number of cases in the
short term when compared to weaker interventions.
Long-term impact of lockdown on the outbreak in India
We took a close look at what might be coming in the next two months, based on what we
have seen in other countries and an epidemiologic model that has been gainfully employed
to assess the effect of interventions in Hubei province (L. Wang et al., 2020). We estimate
that roughly 388 thousand (upper 95% CrI 2.4 million), 7.5 million (upper 95% CrI 104
million), and 18.5 million (upper 95% CrI 196 million) cases are prevented on May 15, June
15, and July 15, respectively, by instituting a 21-day lockdown with quick adherence and a
cautious return compared to perpetual social distancing and travel ban (without lockdown)
respectively, compared to perpetual social distancing.
Without some measures of suppression after lockdown is lifted, the impact of lockdown in
bringing down the case-counts (the now ubiquitous term, flattening the curve) can be
(normal) curve first passes the social distancing and travel ban curve on June 5. In
particular, if people immediately go back to pre-intervention (normal) activities postlockdown, a surge in the predicted case-counts is expected in the long-term beyond what we
would have seen if there were only social distancing and travel ban measures without any
lockdown (27 million when post-lockdown activity returns to pre-intervention levels versus
26 million under social distancing and travel ban without a lockdown period on July 31;
return post-lockdown would surpass social distancing and travel ban (if these scenarios
continued perpetually). Long-term forecasting under slow adherence (2-week delay) can be
We present posterior density and trace plots for the underlying model parameters ,  and
R0, posterior distributions for the predictions Y and the latent proportions  for the I and R
compartments over time, and estimates and posterior distribution of the daily prevalence of
active cases over time or
Ray et al.
Relative impact of duration of lockdown on predicted case-counts
We took the quick adherence epidemiologic models and compared the 21-day lockdown
21-day lockdown with a hypothetical lockdown of longer duration, we find that 28-, 42-, and
56-day lockdowns can approximately prevent 733 thousand (upper 95% CrI 6.8 million), 1.4
million (upper 95% CrI 9.8 million), 1.6 million (upper 95% CrI 10.3 million) cases by June
15, respectively. These numbers correspond to a relative reduction in cases of 45%, 86% and
96%, respectively. A 28-day lockdown does not appear to have a substantial impact on
cumulative case counts when compared to a 21-day lockdown. From an epidemiologic
perspective, there appears to be some evidence that suggests a 42- or 56-day lockdown
would have a more meaningful impact on reducing cumulative COVID-19 case counts in
India. Our models suggest that some form of post-lockdown suppression (e.g., extension of
social distancing measures, limits of gathering size, etc.) is necessary to observe long-term
benefits of the lockdown period. We note that longer lockdown periods are also
accompanied by increasing costs to individuals such as economic costs, mental health issues,
other public health exacerbation costs, and must be considered in policymaking.
Lockdown duration study under the slow adherence (2-week delay) scenario can be found in
Sensitivity analyses
We did explore some alternative assumptions and conducted thorough sensitivity analysis
before settling on the models presented above. In one example, we assumed that there are
actually 10 times the number of reported cases to date to reflect potential underreporting of
cases due to lack of testing. We note that our predictions of case-counts indeed go up and the
under-reporting). In another scenario, we assumed these cases occurred in metropolitan
areas to reflect a potential intensification of case clustering. In our primary analyses, we
assumed that the cumulative case-counts across the country represent equal contributions
from all the regions, and using the whole population of India as a scaling factor to compute
initial inputs for Y 1:
t0 and Y 1: t0. This may lead to extremely small proportions, which may
in turn yield underestimated outputs from the eSIR model. Changing the total population
size from that of India to that of representative (large) cities from the hub states (the states of
Kerala, Maharashtra and Karnataka, and the national capital region of Delhi) is a simple but
intuitive way to potentially do away with the aforementioned underestimation. We note that
yet a third scenario, we hypothesized that the prior mean of R0 is set at 3.0 or 4.0 instead of
2.0 (i.e., a single infected individual would infect 3 or 4 susceptible individuals, on average,
between 1.8 and 2.4, irrespective of whether a higher/lower starting (prior) mean was used.
We observe that a prior mean of 4.0 for R0 sways the posterior R0 estimate substantially
(posterior mean 3.38). As more data accumulate, we will expect the effect of the prior on the
posterior estimates to diminish. The posterior distributions of the prevalence in each
Ray et al.
compartment and latent proportions under these changing scenarios are available in
In summary, these sensitivity analysis scenarios did not appreciably change our conclusions
in broad qualitative terms, though the exact quantitative projections for case-counts are quite
sensitive to such choices. We note that the estimate of basic reproduction number R0 is more
robust to underreporting issues as counts in all compartments of our eSIR model are
assumed to be underreported. Since underreported case-counts affect all our hypothetical
intervention scenarios in a similar way, the relative comparison of interventions and the
associated conclusion remain valid in a qualitative sense. In all cases, our confidence in
these projections decreases markedly the farther into the future we try to forecast. It is
extremely important to update these models as new data arise.
Model Calibration
To check the calibrating properties of our model, we truncated the data to certain dates and
tried assessing the quality of the case-count predictions with essentially adding one more
do notice the projected case-counts change significantly with more data and improve
(become closer to the observed) with more data. Our projections always underestimate the
observed counts. This phenomenon is also due to more testing being done each week.
However, the observed number of infected cases is always within the 95% prediction
credible interval provided by our model. This again reveals the large uncertainty in our
Our projections using current daily data on case counts until April 14 in India show that the
lockdown, if implemented correctly in the end, has a high chance of reducing the number of
COVID-19 cases in the short term and buying India invaluable time to prepare its healthcare
and disease monitoring system. In the long-term, we need to have some measures of
suppression in place after the lockdown is lifted to prevent a massive surge in the number of
cases that can quickly overwhelm an already over-stretched Indian healthcare system
resulting in increased fatalities. Specific vulnerable populations will be at higher risk of
severity and fatality from COVID-19 infection: older persons and persons with pre-existing
medical conditions (e.g., high blood pressure, heart disease, lung disease, cancer, diabetes,
immunocompromised persons) (Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): Are You at Higher
1 provides a description of the approximate number of individuals in these high-risk
categories in India. Beyond the fragile population characterized by health and economic
indicators, we must remember that healthcare workers and first responders at the front line
of this pandemic are amongst the most vulnerable (C. Wang et al., 2020). Though we have
focused on forecasting and modeling of COVID-19 case-counts in this paper, we recognize
that this is only one component of the problem. Long term surveillance and management of
the COVID-19 crisis is needed with not just public health in mind but also to take care of the
economic, social, and psychological impact that it will have on the people of India.
Ray et al.
Our statistical modeling and forecasts are not without limitations. We have limited number
of data points and a wide time-window to extrapolate for the long-term forecasts. The
uncertainty in our predictions is large due to many unknowns arising from model
assumptions, population demographics, the number of COVID-19 diagnostic tests
administered per day, testing criteria, accuracy of the test results, and heterogeneity in
implementation of different government-initiated interventions and community-level
protective measures across the country. We have neither accounted for age-structure, contact
patterns or spatial information to finesse our predictions (Klein et al., 2020; Mandal et al.,
2020; Singh & Adhikari, 2020) nor considered the possibility of a latent number of true
cases, only a fraction of which are ascertained and observed (C. Wang et al., 2020). Increase
in frequency and scale of testing, and community transmission of the SARS-CoV-2 virus
may lead to a spike in a single day and that can shift the projection curve substantially
upwards. COVID-19 hotspots in India are not uniformly spread across the country, and statelevel forecasts (S. Das, 2020) may be more meaningful for state-level policymaking. We are
assuming that the implementation and effects of public health interventions and policies are
the same everywhere in India by treating India as a homogeneous unit.
The eSIR model treats the entire group of people within a single compartment as
homogenous and exchangeable. We also assume that all subjects who were not infected are
susceptible. Certainly, this overlooks the possibilities of people moving between states and
different subsets of infected and susceptible populations having greater or lesser likelihood
of coming into contact with one another. To account for all such potential factors, we need
more nuanced modeling. One potential way is to break up the interaction component into
further sub-compartments; however, sparsity of current data in each sub-compartment is an
issue. Another way that has been pursued in a recent study is to inform the SIR modeling via
introducing contact networks at the initial stage (Bhattacharyya et al., 2020). However, it is
worth noting that any such approach would need more granular and reliable data containing
individual details of the confirmed cases including their location and travel history. Even
though such data are available from some self-reporting-based repositories (Novel Corona
Virus 2019 Dataset, 2020), the quality and detail of the information provided are quite
heterogeneous and, thus, how to best utilize such data remains a question. We see the
tremendous role of data and its transparency of collection and reporting in finessing our
predictions. Accurate and consistent reporting of case counts and deaths due to COVID-19
are extremely critical. Future opportunities for improving our model include incorporating
contagion network, age-structure, estimating SEIR model, incorporating test imperfection,
and estimating true fatality/death rates. Future research would benefit from easily accessible
hospitalization data, accurate recording of deaths in death records, and availability of
ecological-level covariate data. Regardless of the caveats in our study, our analyses show the
impact and necessity of lockdown and of suppressed activity post-lockdown in India.
Though the exact numerical projections are perhaps far from the truth, the qualitative
inference on the relative effects of the interventions are still valuable and valid since all
projections are subject to similar biases.
Ray et al.
One ideological limitation of considering only the perspective of controlling COVID-19
transmission in our model is the inability to account for excess deaths due to other causes
during this period (chronic disease and mental health related diseases in particular), or the
flexibility to factor in reduction in mortality/morbidity due to some other infectious or flulike illnesses, traffic accidents or health benefits of reduced air pollution levels. A more
expansive framework of a cost-benefit analysis is needed as we gather more data and build
may affect our conclusions. Indias priorities in testing have changed multiple times over the
last few weeks. On March 17, India proposed testing all people who recently traveled
internationally and developed symptoms (fever, cough, difficulty in breathing etc.) of
COVID-19 within 14 days of return, or all symptomatic contacts of laboratory confirmed
positive cases, or all symptomatic health care workers managing respiratory distress. On
March 20, India revised this testing strategy to include all symptomatic healthcare workers,
all hospitalized patients with Severe Acute Respiratory Illness (fever and cough and/or
shortness of breath), and asymptomatic direct and high-risk contacts of a confirmed case to
be tested once between day 5 and day 14 of coming into contact. More recently, the testing
strategy was again revised on April 9 to additionally include testing of all symptomatic
people in hotspots/cluster and in large migration gatherings/evacuee centers. These testing
We looked a little deeper into the issue of testing bias using data from Our World in Data
(staying at about 4%) and do not show an obvious increasing trend yet like in other countries
have performed remarkably in administering a large number of tests per detected case and
serve as examples for the world. We also looked at the proportion of the population tested in
tested around 13% of the population, India has tested roughly 0.06% population and it will
take weeks if not months for India to reach testing 13% of the population. In the absence of
rapid and large-scale testing, informative proxies or surrogates can be tracked through
syndromic surveillance, temperature reporting, monitoring hospital admissions and medical
claims due to respiratory and flu like illnesses. This additional information will strengthen
the prediction models. In absence of these models we rely on sensitivity analysis for
Our data science product
Finally, in our strong commitment to reproducibility and dissemination of our research, we
cov-ind-19) and created an interactive and dynamic RShiny app (covind19.org) to visualize
Ray et al.
the observed data and create predictions under hypothetical scenarios with quantification of
uncertainties. These forecasts are updated daily as new data come in. We hope these
products will remain our contribution and service as data scientists during this tragic global
catastrophe, and the model and methods will be used to analyze data from other countries.
Our epidemiologic and mathematical calculations make a convincing case for enforcing
national lockdown in the largest democracy in the world, acting early, before the growth of
COVID-19 infections in India starts to accelerate. We observe the public health benefit of
extending the lockdown by 35 weeks in our projections. Measures of suppression are
needed post-lockdown to acquire maximal long-term benefits from the lockdown. We also
illustrate the critical role of epidemiologic forecasting in aiding policy decisions through this
modeling exercise. We highlight the importance of conducting model checks, sensitivity
analysis and uncertainty quantification.
We realize that these draconian public health measures come at a tremendous price to social
and economic health that can last for months or even years after the restrictions on social
mobility are lifted. Our general message to the public is to proceed with prudence and
caution and adhere to effective public health interventions until there are rapid and reliable
home testing kits [there is none yet] (Food and Drug Administration, 2020), FDA approved
drugs [Solidarity Trial] (World Health Organization, 2020), and a vaccine [5 clinical trials
Professor Ravi Pendse, for enabling daily updates to our models and allocating us abundant computational
came together to provide their service as quarantined data scientists. We thank our families and friends for their
support during these unprecedented times. The initial report made a profound impact through media outlets; we
found inspiration in the heroic battles by frontline health workers, we found hope in science, we found strength in
the power of common people and we found solace in the magic of human kindness. We wish the government and
Disclosure Statement
Proportion of population in specifically vulnerable subgroups at potentially high risk of
COVID-19 severity risk in India.
Number (in millions)
Prinja et al. 2019
Ray et al.
Number (in millions)
Population over 65
CIA World Factbook
Gupta & Ram 2019
Gupta & Ram 2019
People with cardiovascular disease*
Prabhakaran et al. 2018
Population with COPD*
Population with asthma*
Develop cancer by age 75 (men)**
Develop cancer by age 75 (men)**
Population with diabetes (adult)
Access to inpatient department facilities***
Access to outpatient department***
based on 2020 est. of 1.38 billion from UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs
defined as within 5-kilometer distance of home or work
of Cancer Prevention and Research
Intervention landscape of countries severely affected by COVID-19
Date of1st
Lockdown in Wuhan on 01/22, extended to neighboring cities in 1
Hubei province on 01/23. Wuhan lockdown to be lifted on 04/08.
Tested widely for the virus, isolated cases and quarantined
transmission of the virus. The country appears to have reined in
the outbreak without some of the2strict lockdown strategies
deployed elsewhere in the world.
On 01/31, restricted travel from China; expanded restrictions to
other countries on 02/29. On 03/03, CDC lifted all restrictions on
testing. On 03/15, CDC recommends no gatherings of350 people
or more. Stay-at-home directives issued at state-level.
On 03/17, France imposed a nationwide lockdown, prohibiting
gatherings of any size and postponing the second round its
municipal elections. The lockdown was one of Europes most
stringent. While residents were told to stay home, officials
allowed people to go out for fresh air but warned that meeting a 3
friend on the street or in a park would be punishable with a fine.
Germany has a National Pandemic Plan, with three stages. In the
identifying contact persons, who are put in personal quarantine
and are monitored and tested. In the second stage (protection) the
strategy will change to using measures to protect vulnerable
persons from becoming infected. The final stage (mitigation) will
try to avoid spikes4of intensive treatment in order to maintain
medical services.
Citizens advised to stay at home. Violators to be fined with the
exception of a few special circumstances, in order to contain the
spread of the disease. The government is supporting and
curative options.
Ray et al.
Date of1st
Flights to China suspended and a national emergency declared on
universities closed on 03/04. By 03/09, the entire nation placed
under lockdown, with restaurants, bars closing on 03/11 and 6
factories closing on 03/22. All nonessential production halted.
bars, restaurants and shops selling nonessential items have been 7
shut since March 14 and most of the population is house bound.
prayers and moved to restrict visitors from China. On 03/15, the
official leading Iran's response to the new coronavirus
acknowledged Sunday that the pandemic could overwhelm health
facilities in his
8 country, which is battling the worst outbreak in the
Middle East.
Date of 1 case data obtained from JHU CSSE time series data on LUV1D-19 (except for China & South Korea)
Comparison of types of infectious disease models, specifically those used to study
COVID-19 in India
Model type
Research question
Gupta and
Provide estimate of
the infected
population using
death counts
Simple model helpful
for scant data; modeled
epidemic hotspots
Not accounted for
population demographics
(limited by data), nonpharmaceutical (NP)
intervention effects; requires
infection fatality rate
Poisson log-linear
prediction of future
case counts;
estimate R0
Simple model helpful
for short- & mediumterm forecasts using
scant data; accounted for
quadratic effect of time
Not accounted for
population demographics
(limited by data), hotspots,
NP intervention effects;
surveillance bias
Deb and
Analyze the trend
pattern of
incidence; estimate
Accounted for quadratic
effect of time, lockdown
effect; captured time
dependence incidence
Not accounted for
population demographics
(limited by data), hotspots;
surveillance bias
Ray et al.
Model type
Research question
prediction of future
case counts;
estimate R0
Classical epidemiologic
model used; accounted
for social distancing
Not accounted for
population demographics
(limited by data), hotspots;
surveillance bias; used first
few weeks of data
SIR model
Dhanwant and
prediction of future
case counts
Classical epidemiologic
model used; split
observed data into
training and test data;
training data used to
learn the transmission
rate; incorporated
lockdown effect
Not accounted for
population demographics
(limited by data), hotspots;
surveillance bias; lockdown
training data not used to
learn about transmission
rate under lockdown
SIR model
Singh and
Study progress of
the disease and
impact of social
measures; estimate
Extended epidemiologic
model accounting for
age distribution, social
contact, social
distancing effect
Not accounted for other
population demographics
(limited by data), hotspots;
surveillance bias; complex
model given the scant count
data and spotty individuallevel data
Mandal et al.
Identify NP
strategies that can
help control the
Extended epidemiologic
model with an added
compartment for
quarantine; accounted
for other NP
interventions, and
connectivity between
two places
Not accounted for
population demographics
(limited by data);
surveillance bias; complex
model given the scant count
data; lockdown effect not
studied; studied four cities
Expanded SEIR
Chatterjee et
Assess the impact
on healthcare
resources; study the
effect of different
NP interventions
Extended epidemiologic
model with added subcompartments for
quarantined, recovered
and death; accounted for
different NP
interventions; accounted
for age groups
Not accounted for other
population demographics
(limited by data), hotspots;
surveillance bias; complex
model given the scant count
data and spotty individuallevel data; hospitalizationrelated parameters based on
UK data; lockdown effect
not studied
Extended epidemiologic
model with added subcompartments for
asymptomatic cases,
hospitalized, recovered
and death
Not accounted for other
population demographics
(limited by data), hotspots;
surveillance bias; complex
model given the scant count
data; lockdown effect not
Extended epidemiologic
model with added subcompartments for
asymptomatic cases,
lockdown, hospitalized,
recovered and death;
accounted for
transmission variability
between symptomatic
and asymptomatic
groups; modeled
hotspots and overall
Not accounted for other
population demographics
(limited by data);
surveillance bias; complex
model given the scant count
Expanded SEIR
Senapati et al.
Assess the effect of
different NP
Expanded SEIR
Sardar et al.
Assess long-term
effect of 21-day
lockdown; estimate
Ray et al.
The SIR model with (A) or without (B) considering human intervention by introducing a
transmission rate modifier (t).
Ray et al.
Implied R0 schedules corresponding to the hypothetical scenarios under slow adherence.
Ray et al.
Short-term daily growth in cumulative case counts in India assuming a 2- week delay in
peoples adherence to restrictions. Observed data are shown for days up to April 14.
Predicted future case counts for April 15 until April 30 are based on observed data until
April 14 using the eSIR model.
Ray et al.
Long-term daily growth in case counts in India per 100,000 people assuming a 2-week delay
and how that is affected by different non-pharmaceutical intervention strategies. Predicted
cumulative (a) and incident (b) case counts from April 30 to July 31 from the eSIR model
are shown, based on observed data until April 14.
a. Predicted number of COVID-19 cases in India under hypothetical scenarios
b. Predicted number of new COVID-19 cases in India under hypothetical scenarios
Ray et al.
Ray et al.
Ray et al.
Trace plots and posterior density plots for the underlying model parameters  (a),  (b), and
R0 (c), posterior distributions for the predictions Y and the latent proportions  for the I (d)
and R (e) compartments over time, and estimates and posterior distribution of the daily
prevalence of active cases over time or
(f). These plots correspond to the 21-day
lockdown with moderate return scenario under quick adherence.
a. Trace plots and posterior density plots for 
Ray et al.
b. Trace plots and posterior density plots for 
c. Trace plots and posterior density plots for R0
d. Posterior distribution for the predictions Y and the latent proportions  for the I (infected)
e. Posterior distribution for the predictions Y and the latent proportions  for the R
f. Estimates and posterior distribution of the daily prevalence of active cases over time or
Ray et al.
Cumulative (a) and incidence (b) graphs for forecasting models assuming a 2-week delay
under 21-, 28-, 42-, and 56-day lockdown scenarios using observed data through April 14.
a. Predicted number of COVID-19 infections under varying lockdown lengths
b. Predicted number of daily COVID-19 infections under varying lockdown lengths
Ray et al.
Implied R0 schedules corresponding to quick and slow adherence for the hypothetical
lockdown duration scenarios.
a. R0 over time by scenario
b. R0 over time by scenario
Ray et al.
Ray et al.
Posterior distributions of the projected case-counts and latent proportions under sensitivity
a. Scenario with 10 times the number of reported cases (e.g., under-reporting)
b. Scenario using metro population (e.g., to mimic case-clustering)
c. Scenario with prior mean of R0 = 2
d. Scenario with prior mean of R0 = 3
e. Scenario with prior mean of R0 = 4
Ray et al.
Model Calibration: Relative comparison of predictions using observed data up to a certain
date (April 1, 7 and 14). Observed data (gray) is provided through April 30.
Ray et al.
Daily testing patterns in selected countries
Ray et al.
Testing numbers and proportions for 61 countries around the world affected by COVID-19
Bhattacharyya R, Mohammed S, Baladandayuthapani V, Banerjee S, & Nanda U (2020, 4). Regional
Contact Networks and the Pandemic Spread of COVID-19 in India. Medium.
Chatterjee K, Chatterjee K, Kumar A, & Shankar S (2020). Healthcare impact of COVID-19 epidemic
Chen N, Zhou M, Dong X, Qu J, Gong F, Han Y, Qiu Y, Wang J, Liu Y, Wei Y, Xia J, Yu T, Zhang X,
& Zhang L (2020). Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel
coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study. The Lancet, 395(10223), 507513.
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): Are You at Higher Risk for Severe Illness? (2020). Centers
Das P (2020, 4 1). Epidemiologic models show we need aggressive measures in the early
Das S (2020). Prediction of COVID-19 disease progression in India: Under the effect of national
Deb S, & Majumdar M (2020). A time series method to analyze incidence pattern and estimate
Ray et al.
Dong E, Du H, & Gardner L (2020). An interactive web-based dashboard to track COVID-19 in real
time. The Lancet Infectious Diseases 10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30120-1.
Ellis-Petersen H (2020, 3 25). Overcome by anxiety: Indians in lockdown many can ill afford. The
Food and Drug Administration. (2020, 3 20). Coronavirus (COVID-19) Update: FDA Alerts
Ghosal D (2020, 3 23). India faces spike in coronavirus cases, says study, in test for health system.
Guan W, Ni Z, Hu Y, Liang W, Ou C, He J, Liu L, Shan H, Lei C, Hui DSC, Du B, Li L, Zeng G, Yuen
K-Y, Chen R, Tang C, Wang T, Chen P, Xiang J,  Zhong N (2020). Clinical characteristics of
Gupta S, & Shankar R (2020). Estimating the number of COVID-19 infections in Indian hotspots using
Hasell J, Ortiz-Ospina E, Mathieu E, Ritchie H, Beltekian D, Macdonald B, & Roser M (n.d.). Our
Indian Council of Medical Research. (2020). SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) Testing: Status Update 14
April 2020 9:00 PM IST.
Klein E, Lin G, Tseng K, Schueller E, Kappor G, & Laxminarayan R (2020). COVID-19 for India
Li Q, Guan X, Wu P, Wang X, Zhou L, Tong Y, Ren R, Leung KSM, Lau EHY, Wong JY, Xing X,
Xiang N, Wu Y, Li C, Chen Q, Li D, Liu T, Zhao J, Liu M,  Feng Z (2020). Early transmission
Medicine, 382(13), 11991207. 10.1056/NEJMoa2001316. [PubMed: 31995857]
Lin X (2020). Analysis of 25,000 lab-confirmed COVID-19 cases in Wuhan: Epidemiological
Mandal S, Bhatnagar T, Arinaminpathy N, Agarwal A, Chowdhury A, Murhekar M, Gangakhedkar R,
& Sarkar S (2020). Prudent public health intervention strategies to control the coronavirus disease
Microsoft bing COVID-19 tracker. (n.d.). Microsoft Corporation. Retrieved March 19, 2020, from
Mkhatshwa T, & Mummert A (2010). Modeling super-spreading events for infectious diseases: Case
Noronha G (2020, 4 10). India could see a reduction in the number of coronavirus cases by next week:
Oke J, & Henegan C (2020, 4). Global COVID-19 Case Fatality Rates. CEBM Research.
Ray et al.
Pan A, Liu L, Wang C, Guo H, Hao X, Wang Q, Huang J, He N, Yu H, Lin X, Wei S, & Wu T (2020).
Association of public health interventions with the epidemiology of the COVID-19 outbreak in
Wuhan, China. JAMA 10.1001/jama.2020.6130.
Plummer M, Stukalov A, & Denwood M (n.d.). rjags: Bayesian Graphical Models using MCMC.
Ranjan R (2020). Predictions for COVID-19 outbreak in India using epidemiological models.
Ray D, Bhattacharyya R, Wang L, Salvatore M, Mohammed S, Halder A, Zhou Y, Song P, Purkayastha
S, Bose D, Banerjee M, Baladandayuthapani V, Ghosh P, & Mukherjee B (2020, 3 21). Predictions
Root A (2020, 4). Nearly a third of Americans with COVID-19 are hospitalized. Here are the latest
numbers. Barrons.
coronavirus. Epidemiology and Health, 42, e2020006 10.4178/epih.e2020006. [PubMed:
Salvatore M, Ray D, Du J, Wang L, Das S, Kleinsasser M, Rix A, Barker D, & Mukherjee B (2020, 4).
Salvatore M, Wang L, Bhattacharyya R, Purkayastha S, Mohammed S, Halder A, Barker D,
Kleinsasser M, Rix A, Banerjee M, Baladandayuthapani V, Ray D, & Mukherjee B (2020, 4 3).
Historic 21-day lockdown, predictions for lockdown effects and the role of data in this crisis of
Sardar T, Nadim SS, & Chattopadhyay J (2020). Assessment of 21 days lockdown effect in some states
Senapati A, Rana S, Das T, & Chattopadhyay J (2020). Impact of intervention on the spread of
Sindhu J, Reddy KK, Satyanarayana N, Devaraya S, & Fathima A (2019). Hospital utilization
statistics: Thirty-five year trend analysis, a measure of operational efficiency of a tertiary care
Singh R, & Adhikari R (2020). Age-structured impact of social distancing on the COVID-19 epidemic
Times of India. (2020, 3). Coronavirus: Does India have enough ventilators, hospital beds? The Times
Wang C, Liu L, Hao X, Guo H, Wang Q, Huang J, He N, Yu H, Lin X, Pan A, Wei S, & Wu T (2020).
Evolving epidemiology and impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on the outbreak of
coronavirus disease 2019 in Wuhan, China. MedRxiv. 10.1101/2020.03.03.20030593.
Wang L, Zhou Y, He J, Zhu B, Wang F, Tang L, Eisenberg M, & Song PX (2020). An epidemiological
forecast model and software assessing interventions on COVID-19 epidemic in China. MedRxiv.
WHO Director-Generals opening remarks at the media briefing on COVID-19  11 March 2020.
Ray et al.
World Health Organization. (2020, 3 27). WHO Director-Generals opening remarks at the media
Ray et al.
Description of the cases, recovered and fatalities in India with landmark policy/
recommendations. Data used up to April 14.
Ray et al.
Early phase of the epidemic and daily growth in cumulative COVID-19 case counts in India
compared to other countries affected by the pandemic using data through April 14.
Ray et al.
Implied R0 schedules corresponding the hypothetical scenarios under quick adherence.
Ray et al.
Short-term daily growth in cumulative case counts in India assuming a 1-week delay in
peoples adherence to restrictions. Observed data are shown for days up to April 14.
Predicted future case counts for April 15 until April 30 are based on observed data until
April 14 using the eSIR model. The dashed horizontal line represents the upper 95%
credible limit for estimates under lockdown with moderate release scenario.
Ray et al.
Long-term daily growth in case counts in India per 100,000 people assuming a 1-week delay
and how that is affected by different non-pharmaceutical intervention strategies. Predicted
cumulative (a) and incident (b) case counts from May 1 to July 31 from the eSIR model are
shown, based on observed data until April 14. Corresponding plots for slow adherence are in
a. Predicted number of COVID-19 cases in India under hypothetical scenarios
b. Predicted number of new COVID-19 cases in India under hypothetical scenarios
Ray et al.
Cumulative (a) and incidence (b) graphs for forecasting models assuming a 1-week delay
under 21-, 28-, 42-, and 56-day lockdown scenarios using observed data through April 14.
a. Predicted number of COVID-19 infections under varying lockdown lengths
b. Predicted number of daily COVID-19 infections under varying lockdown lengths
Ray et al.
Timeline of COVID-19 interventions in India.
 India issues travel ban on four countries - China, South Korea, Italy, and Iran
 Union Health Ministry issues advisory to avoid mass gatherings
 Mayor of Agra urges the Union government to close down historical monuments including Taj Mahal
 Kuwait suspends flights to India
 Qatar puts India on travel ban list
 Manipur closes its border with Myanmar
 India suspends all visas/e-visas granted to nationals of France, Germany, and Spain on or before today
 WHO declares the COVID-19 outbreak as pandemic
 India suspends all visas excepting those for diplomatic, UN, or international bodies, official and employment purposes until
 India reports 1st death
 India reports 2nd death
 Several academic institutions (e.g., JNU, IIT, IIM) cancel classes/convocations; some hostels close
 Central government proposes social distancing measures until March 31
 India bans passengers from EU countries, UK, and Turkey until March 31
 Central government recommends closure of educational institutions until March 31
 Taj Mahal is shut until March 31; ASI closes 3,000 monuments and 200 museums
 Mandatory quarantine is imposed on passengers coming from UAE, Qatar, Oman, and Kuwait
 India is heading towards a countrywide lockdown mode
 Some state governments ban public transportation
 Prime Minister urges people of India to observe self-imposed curfew (Janata Curfew) on March 22
 Maharashtra announces lockdown in Mumbai, Nagpur and Pune
 Private labs can conduct COVID-19 tests, says Maharashtra government
 Rajasthan government declares lockdown until March 31
 12 states including Telangana and Delhi announce lockdown until March 31
 Railways suspends all train services until March 31
 Central government orders all states in India to impose lockdown
 Legal action is to be initiated against people violating lockdown measures
 Prime Minister of India announces lockdown for 21 days as country records 552 COVID-19 cases and 10 deaths
 Central government unveils stimulus package to help those hit by 21-day lockdown
 Priorities are to construct COVID-19 hospitals, sample testing, contact-tracing and social distancing: Union Health ministry
 Common exit strategy necessary for staggered relaxations after lockdown period ends, Prime Minister tells chief ministers
 Prime Minister instructs union ministers to prepare a graded plan to gradually open departments that are not COVID-19
 Prime Minister and chief ministers decide on lockdown extension to April 11
 Odisha extends lockdown until April 30 and becomes first Indian state to do so
Ray et al.
Comparison of estimated projections and posterior estimates of model parameters across different sensitivity
analysis scenarios under 21-day lockdown with moderate return, using observed data until April 14. Prior SD
for R0 is 1.0.
Posterior Estimates
Sensitivity Analysis Scenario
Predictions May 15
Prior mean for R0 = 2
Prior mean for R0 = 3
Prior mean for R0 = 4
Observed case-counts are multiplied by 10, prior mean for R0 = 2
Assume that the cases happen in metro hotspots, use population size N=32 million instead of national population 1.34 billion, prior mean for R0
Ray et al.
Comparison of model projections using observed data up to different dates assuming a 21-day lockdown with
moderate return.
Projected Counts [Upper Credible Interval]
Posterior Estimates [95% CrI]
Used data up to April 1
Used data up to April 7
Used data up to April 14
Note: All prediction scenarios assume a prior mean of R0 = 2
