prior  infection  to  SARS‐CoV‐2 Eric J. Nilles,1,2* Elizabeth W.
Karlson,1,2*  Maia  Norman,1,2,3,4  Tal  Gilboa,1,2,4   Stephanie
Fischinger,5 Caroline Atyeo,5 Guohai Zhou,1,2 Christopher L. Ben‐
nett,1,2,6  Nicole  V.  Tolan,1,2  Karina  Oganezova,1  David  R.
Walt,1,2,4   Galit   Alter,2,5,7   Daimon  P.  Simmons,1,2  Peter
Schur,1,2 Petr Jarolim,1,2 Lindsey R. Baden,1,2 Brigham and  Wom‐
ens  Hospital, Boston, MA Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
MA Keywords:  SARS‐CoV‐2,  COVID‐19,  serology,  antibodies,  im‐
munoassays  Running title: SARS‐CoV‐2 immunoassay assessment Cor‐
respondence: Eric Nilles, Brigham and Womens Hospital, 75 Francis
St.,  Boston  02115 SARS‐CoV‐2 immunoassays can be valuable tools
for informing the global response, but many  currently  available
assays have not been independently validated. We conducted a per‐
formance assessment of four assays including the  Roche  Diagnos‐
tics  and  Epitope Diagnostics immunoassays.  Seroepidemiology is
an important tool to characterize the epidemiology and  immunobi‐
ology of SARS‐CoV‐2 but many immunoassays have not been external‐
ly validated raising questions about reliability of  study  find‐
ings. To ensure meaningful data, particularly in a low seropreva‐
lence population, assays need to be rigorously characterized with
high specificity.  232 pre‐pandemic negative controls. Sensitivi‐
ty was stratified by time from symptom onset.  The  Simoa  multi‐
plex  assay  applied three pre‐defined algorithm models to deter‐
mine sample The Roche and Ragon/MGH IgG  assays  each  registered
1/232  false  positive,  the primary Simoa model registered 2/232
false positives, and the Epitope registered 2/230 and 3/230 false
positives  for  the  IgG and IgM assays respectively. Sensitivity
>21 days post symptom‐onset was 100% for all assays  except  Epi‐
tope  IgM,  but lower and/or with greater variability between as‐
says for samples collected 9‐14 days  (67‐100%)  and  15‐21  days
(69‐100%)  post‐symptom  onset.  The Simoa and Epitope IgG assays
demonstrated excellent sensitivity earlier in the disease course.
The  Roche  and Ragon/MGH assays were less sensitive during early
disease, particularly among  immunosuppressed  individuals.   The
Epitope  IgG  demonstrated  good sensitivity and specificity. The
Roche and Ragon/MGH IgG assays registered  rare  false  positives
with  lower  early sensitivity. The Simoa assay primary model had
excellent sensitivity and few false positives.   In  response  to
the rapid global spread of a novel virus, severe acute respirato‐
ry syndrome 2 acute or prior infection with SARS‐CoV‐2. Serologi‐
cal  assays  to detect antibodies to SARS‐CoV‐2 have received at‐
tention due to the large number of immunoassays being used for  a
range  of purposes despite suboptimal validation [13].  Immunoas‐
says are powerful tools that can be used to characterize the epi‐
demiology  and  convalescent  plasma  donors [9], and potentially
provide additional approaches for the clinical diagnosis of acute
infection  [10].  Seroepidemiological uses of these tools are nu‐
merous and include characterizing population‐level seroprevalence
[6];  identifying the fraction of asymptomatic and unreported in‐
fections [11]; informing group‐specific and population‐level con‐
trol interventions [12]; monitoring transmission dynamics and the
impact of control interventions over time [6,13];  and  informing
core  epidemiological  parameters such as the basic and effective
reproductive  numbers  and  infection  and  case  fatality  rates
[1417].   Serology‐based  cohort  studies  that combine classical
seroepidemiological approaches with  deep  immune  profiling  can
characterize  the nature and kinetics of the humoral response and
inform key questions including risks for reinfection and the  pa‐
rameters of protective titers However, despite enormous potential
to guide the global COVID‐19 response, confidence in  serological
tests and consequently the results of seroepidemiological studies
have been undermined by poor (or poorly defined) test  character‐
istics  [3]. Given the importance of vigorous and independent im‐
munoassay cross validation, we report on the performance  of  two
Ethical  considerations The use of study samples and data was ap‐
proved by the Mass General Brigham (MGB) Study design Study  sam‐
ples Two panels of positive and negative control samples were se‐
lected from the MGB Biobank, a biorepository that  contains  bio‐
logical  samples  and  linked  demographic and clinical data from
>117,000 patients enrolled through the MGB network  [19].   Posi‐
tive  control  panel: To assess sensitivity, we selected 68 posi‐
tive control samples from 28 patients that had been  hospitalized
at the Brigham and Womens Hospital (BWH) between March 30 and May
4, 2020, and that previously tested positive by SARS‐CoV‐2 rever‐
setranscriptase  polymerase chain reaction (RT‐PCR). Samples were
collected a mean of 10.5 days (standard deviation 6.0 days) post‐
RT‐PCR  confirmation  and 16.1 days (standard deviation 5.4 days)
post‐symptom onset (PSO). The median number of samples per  indi‐
vidual was two (range 1‐5) and the median interval between sample
collection was three days (range 2‐6 days). The Negative  control
panel:  To  assess specificity, we selected 232 prepandemic nega‐
tive control samples from the MGB Biobank collected  between  Au‐
gust  28,  2017  and  September  26, 2019.  The median age was 55
years (range 20‐89) and 90/232 (39%) were female. To determine if
recent  respiratory  infections  may be associated with increased
cross‐reactivity and false positives, we selected  negative  con‐
trols  with and without recent respiratory infections. Of the to‐
tal 232 negative control samples, 100 were from individuals with‐
out  recent  respiratory  illness; 31 from individuals with prior
laboratory‐confirmed respiratory infections; 101 from individuals
with  a  recent  clinical diagnosis of respiratory infections in‐
cluding upper respiratory based  on  diagnoses  recorded  in  the
electronic  health  record  between 1 and 31 days prior to sample
collection.  To ensure valid comparison between assays and  given
differences  in plasma/sera requirements according to manufactur‐
er/assay specifications, we  only  selected  controls  with  both
serum  and  plasma  available  from  the same individual and time
point. All samples were stored at ‐80C following sample  process‐
ing  and none underwent thaw‐refreezing cycles prior to analysis.
Except for sample type (i.e. serum or plasma),  identical  panels
of  positive  and  negative controls were provided to each of the
four participating laboratories (with two fewer samples  provided
to  one  lab).  Samples  were blinded to all laboratory staff and
were only unblinded after results were provided to the  principal
investigators.   Clinical  data  We searched an electronic health
records system linked to the Biobank to extract demographic  data
for all controls and clinical data for positive controls, includ‐
ing chronic medical conditions, level  of  care  (non‐ICU  versus
ICU),  and  date of RT‐PCR test. Two study investigators included
cough, fever, dyspnea, myalgias, new loss of taste or  smell,  or
sore  throat.   Serological  assays and protocols We assessed the
performance of four immunoassays including (i) Elecsys Anti‐SARS‐
CoV‐2 (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, USA) immunoassay intended
for the qualitative detection of antibodies against  the  nucleo‐
capsid  (NC)  antigen [20] (thought to include IgG, IgM, and IgA,
although IgM and IgA are not specified in  product  information);
(ii)  EDI New Coronavirus COVID19 enzyme‐linked immunosorbent as‐
says (ELISA) (Epitope Diagnostics, USA) that detect  IgG  against
the  NC  antigen [21] and IgM against an unspecified antigen[22];
(iii) Ragon/MGH inhouse ELISA  that  detects  IgG,  IgM  and  IgA
against  the  receptor  binding domain (RBD); and (iv) the Single
Molecule Array multiplex assay (Simoa) that detects IgG, IgM, and
IgA  against the spike protein, S1 subunit, RBD, and NC [10]. The
Ragon/MGH assay was performed at the Ragon assays were  performed
according to manufacturer specifications. The Simoa and Ragon/MGH
assays were performed according to previously  described  methods
[10,23].   Result  classification  Threshold cutoffs for defining
positive, negative or indeterminate/borderline test results  were
laboratories  prior  to  the study. The Ragon/MGH positive cutoff
was equal to the mean of the OD‐converted  ug/ml  values  of  the
negative  control  wells on the respective plate plus three times
the standard deviation of the concentration from  over  100  pre‐
pandemic plasma samples. Background‐corrected concentrations were
divided by the cutoff to generate signalto‐cutoff (S/CO)  ratios.
Samples  with  S/CO values greater than 1.0 were considered posi‐
tive.  Given the Simoa multiplex assay includes  12  output  mea‐
sures per sample (IgG, IgM, and IgA against four viral epitopes),
result determination was based upon three  pre‐study  classifica‐
tion  models  trained  using an independent panel of 142 positive
samples by RT‐PCR SARS‐Cov‐2 and 200 negative  pre‐pandemic  con‐
trols. Two models used cross‐validation to select the fewest num‐
ber of informative markers. An Early Model encompassed all  posi‐
tive RT‐PCR timepoints within one week following the positive RT‐
PCR in pre‐pandemic controls. This cross‐validation yielded  four
markers  (IgA  S1,  IgA  Nucleocapsid,  IgG Nucleocapsid, and IgG
Spike) and exhibited the best performance  in  the  training  set
[10]. A Late Model encompassed all RT‐PCR positive timepoints af‐
ter one week since PCR against all  pre‐pandemic  controls.  This
cross‐validation  yielded only a single marker IgA S1. The model‐
specific threshold for a  positive  test  result  was  determined
based on the cutoff that yielded 100% specificity in the training
set. A third model was a simple 12 Parameter logistic  regression
using  all  12  outputs.  Data analysis We performed five primary
independent analyses. One each for the Roche  (which  provides  a
single  result  for all isotypes) and Ragon/MGH (IgG) assays; two
for the Epitope immunoassays (IgG and IgM); and one for the  pri‐
mary  Simoa  assay Early Model. Analyses of the Ragon IgA/IgM and
Simoa Late Model and 12‐Parameter Model are included  in  supple‐
mentary  materials. Indeterminate or borderline results were con‐
sidered negative for all analyses. We determined sensitivity  us‐
ing  positive controls and specificity using negative controls as
the gold standard. Sensitivity was calculated  independently  for
samples  collected  8‐14, 15‐21, and >21 days from symptom onset.
Assay agreement was calculated between the Roche, Ragon/MGH  IgG,
Epitope  IgG, and Simoa Early Model using prevalence‐adjusted and
bias‐adjusted Kappa [24]. Binomial exact 95% confidence intervals
were  calculated for all estimates. All analyses Specificity: The
Roche and Ragon/MGH (IgG) assays registered 1/232 false  positive
for  specificities  of  99.6% (95% CI 98.7‐100%). The Epitope IgG
and IgM assays registered 2/230 and  3/230  false  positives  for
specificities  of  99.1%  (97.9‐100%)  and  98.6% (95% CI 97.2% ‐
100%) respectively. No Epitope  false  positives  overlapped  and
therefore if combining the two assays to provide a single result,
the specificity is lower (5/230 false positives;  97.8%  [95%  CI
95.9100%]).  The  Simoa  Early Model registered 2/232 false posi‐
tives with a specificity of 99.1% (95% 94% and 70%  respectively;
Simoa  Late  and  12‐marker  models demonstrated specificities of
98.7% and 94% (supplemental data). Of  the  combined  nine  false
positives  results (Roche [1], Ragon/MGH IgG [1], Epitope IgG [2]
and IgM [3], and Simoa Early Model [2]), five were from 100 nega‐
tive  controls without recent respiratory infection and four from
132 negative controls with recent respiratory infection, suggest‐
ing  cross reactivity due to recent respiratory infections is un‐
likely to be an important cause of false positives in  these  as‐
says.  No  common  coronaviruses  (e.g. 229E, NL63, OC43 or HKU1)
were documented among these samples, however, so  these  data  do
not  assess  for  common  coronavirus‐specific  cross reactivity.
Sensitivities: All assays except  the  Epitope  IgM  demonstrated
100%  sensitivity  among  samples For the remaining time periods,
the Simoa Early Model registered the fewest false  negatives  and
highest  sensitivities.  However,  confidence intervals generally
overlapped across assays included in the primary analyses  except
for  the earlier time periods when the Simoa Early 4). At 21 days
PSO, the Ragon/MGH IgM and IgA assays demonstrated  sensitivities
of  77.8% and 100% respectively; Simoa Late and 12‐paremeter mod‐
els demonstrated 100% sensitivity individuals  that  subsequently
seroconverted; 6/12 were from three individuals that were receiv‐
ing immunosuppressive therapy; and 2/12 were collected at 11  and
18  days PSO from patients without subsequent sample collections.
Of seven Roche false negatives, 2/7 were  from  individuals  that
seroconverted  in  later  samples;  3/7 samples were from two pa‐
tients receiving immunosuppressive therapy; and the remaining 2/7
were  from  the same patient collected 16 and 18 days PSO. Of two
Epitope IgG false negatives, one later seroconverted and one  was
immunosuppressed.  Of  25 Epitope IgM false negatives, 5/25 later
seroconverted , 6/25 were immunosuppressed, and 14/25  were  col‐
lected  10‐37 days PSO. The Simoa Early Model registered only one
false negative that seroconverted in later samples. When  exclud‐
ing  individuals  receiving  immunosuppressive  therapy and early
samples individuals that subsequently seroconverted,  there  were
no false negatives for the Simoa assay or Epitope IgG assays, two
false negatives apiece for the Ragon/MGH and Roche assays, and 14
false  negatives for the Epitope IgM assay.  Assay agreement: In‐
ter‐assay concordance for negative controls was high for all com‐
binations  of assays with the highest agreement between Roche and
Ragon/MGH IgG assays (Kappa 0.98, 95% CI 0.94‐1.00) and the  low‐
est between Epitope IgG and Simoa Early Model (Kappa 0.97, 95% CI
0.91‐0.99). Of nine total false positives across the five  assays
none  were  overlapping between assays. Inter‐assay agreement for
positive controls was more variable and ranged  from  Kappa  0.94
(95%  CI  0.80‐0.99)  between the Simoa and Epitope IgG assays to
0.68 (95% CI 0.46‐0.83) between the Ragon/MGH IgG and Epitope IgG
and Roche assays. Lower concordance between positive controls was
largely driven by the higher numbers of false negatives  observed
in  the  Ragon/MGH IgG and Roche assays. Of the 20 discrete false
negative results, 10 overlapped between one or more assay.  SARS‐
CoV‐2  immunoassays  using a panel of 300 well characterized con‐
trol samples including 68 positive control samples from 28 RT‐PCR
SARS‐CoV‐2  confirmed  hospitalized patients and 232 pre‐pandemic
negative control samples that included 132 samples from individu‐
als with recent respiratory infections. We assessed the sensitiv‐
ity, specificity, and agreement between assays using  pre‐defined
thresholds  and  methods.  Because the sensitivity of serological
assays is dependent on when samples  are  collected  relative  to
symptom onset, we stratified assay sensitivity by time from symp‐
tom onset to sample collection. To our  knowledge,  this  is  the
first  immunoassay and includes a comprehensive evaluation of the
EDI Epitope assays. Unlike  most  head  to  head  SARS‐CoV‐2  im‐
munoasssay  performance evaluations, unique patient‐sample combi‐
nations were used for all assays.  All four assays performed well
with  small  absolute  differences  between  them.  The Roche and
Ragon/MGH immunoassays registered the lowest number of false pos‐
itives  (1/232)  for  a  specificity of 99.6% (95% CI 98.7‐100%).
These findings align with the Roche assay package insert (10/5272
false  positives,  specificity  99.81% [95% CI 99.65‐99.91%])[20]
and confirm excellent specificity. The Simoa Early Model and Epi‐
tope IgM assay registered two false positives apiece with slight‐
ly lower specificity (99.1% [95% CI  97.9‐100%]),  although  with
overlapping  confidence intervals; the Epitope IgM performed less
well with lower specificity, as did other Simoa  models  and  the
Ragon/MGH  IgM  and IgA assays. The Epitope IgG assay specificity
in this study was higher than other recent studies that  reported
specificities  of  88.7% from 53 negative controls [25] and 89.8%
from 108 negative controls [23]. The overall performance of  Epi‐
tope is superior when considering only the single IgG rather than
combining the IgG and IgM assays. Given that even small decreases
in specificity can substantially decrease the positive predictive
value (PPV), particularly in populations with low pre‐test proba‐
bilities  or  with low true disease prevalence, our findings sug‐
gest the Epitope IgG assay alone is preferable,  particularly  if
used  for seroepidemiological purposes. For example, when testing
a population with a 3% true prevalence of  disease  with  a  test
that  is  98%  specific, the PPV will be approximately 60% and an
estimated four in ten positive results will be  false  positives.
Conversely, if using a test that is 99.5% specific applied to the
same population, the PPV is approximately 85% and  slightly  over
one in seven positive results will be false positives. Given that
most populations globally are  assumed  to  have  low  SARS‐CoV‐2
seroprevalence,  likely <5% with substantial heterogeneity, small
differences in test specificity are of critical  importance  With
the exception of Epitope IgM, all assays demonstrated 100% sensi‐
tivity among samples collected >21 days PSO, although  only  nine
samples  were included from this time period. The sensitivity was
lower with greater variability between assays  for  samples  col‐
lected  earlier after symptom onset. This is to be expected given
serological assays for most pathogens  including  SARS‐CoV‐2  are
well  described  as  having  poor  sensitivity earlier in disease
course. Current reported data suggests  the  mean  interval  from
symptom‐onset  to  seroconversion  for  SARSCoV‐2 is ~13 days for
both IgM and IgG, although substantial heterogeneity  exists  be‐
tween individuals and assays; by 25‐27 days PSO, 98‐100% of cases
are expected  to  be  seropositive  by  most  serological  assays
[26,27].  By  comparison,  the  assays in this study demonstrated
67‐100% sensitivity for samples collected between 8‐14  days  PSO
and 69‐100% sensitivity for samples collected 15‐21 days PSO. The
Simoa Early Model assay demonstrated exellent sensitivity  during
the  earlier  PSO windows. The sensitivity of the Roche assay was
slightly higher during earlier periods and slightly  lower  later
compared  to  data  reported  by the manufacturer; Roche reported
66%, 88% and 100% sensitivity at 0‐6, 7‐13 and  14 days  post‐PCR
confirmation [20], versus our findings of 71%, 95%, and 94% using
the same time and date‐from PCR‐confirmation criteria  (data  not
shown).  The  sensitivity of the Epitope IgG assay was lower than
package insert data that report 100% for 30 positive controls  in
the  second  week  of  disease [21] and lower than a German study
that reported 100% sensitivity for 22 positive controls [25]  but
higher but with overlapping confidence intervals for one US‐based
study that reported sensitivities of 84% at 6‐20 days and 91%  at
>20 days [23].  This study has several limitations. Although this
study was based on well characterized controls, we cannot defini‐
tively  extrapolate findings to other populations [28]. For exam‐
ple, the sensitivity of these assays was assessed in samples from
RT‐PCR  confirmed  hospitalized patients with samples collected a
mean of 16 days (SD 5) after symptom onset. Given most SARS‐CoV‐2
infections  are mild or asymptomatic and do not require hospital‐
ization, and given that little is known about humoral kinetics >2
months  post  infection,  the  sensitivity of these assays may be
lower in individuals > 2 months post‐infection and/or individuals
with  mild  or  asymptomatic  infections  that  likely mount less
durable immune responses [26,28]. We  did  not  include  negative
control  samples  from  individuals  with confirmed common coron‐
aviruses, which may increase cross  reactivity  and  false  posi‐
tives.   Our  study findings align with manufacturer data for the
Roche Diagnostics Elecsys Anti‐SARSCoV‐2 IgG immunoassay and con‐
firm that false positives are rare, specificity is high, and sen‐
sitivity is excellent > 3 weeks after symptom  onset,  but  lower
early in the disease course and among immunocompromised individu‐
als. The Epitope Diagnostics IgG immunoassay has lower specifici‐
ty  and  sensitivity  than data released by the manufacturer, but
overall performed well with few false positives and  high  sensi‐
tivity. The Epitope IgM had more false positives and lower sensi‐
tivity and given IgM does not appear to rise substantially earli‐
er  than  IgG in SARSCoV‐2 infections [26], the Epitope IgM assay
may not add value to the IgG assay alone. The Ragon/MGH  IgG  im‐
munoassay  largely  aligned  with the Roche assay and false posi‐
tives were rare, specificity was high, and sensitivity was excel‐
lent  more  than  three weeks post‐infection but lower earlier in
disease course and among immunosuppressed individuals. The  Simoa
Early Model demonstrated high specificity and excellent sensitiv‐
ity.  Characterizing the epidemiology and immunobiology is a  key
priority  for  informing and responding to the current SARS‐CoV‐2
pandemic. For this we need test performance studies such as  this
to  reliably and independently validate immunoassays.  Krammer F,
Simon V. Serology assays to manage COVID‐19. Science. 2020; Peth‐
erick A. Developing antibody tests for SARS‐CoV‐2. Lancet [Inter‐
net].  Theel ES, Slev P, Wheeler S, Couturier MR, Wong  SJ,  Kad‐
khoda  K.  The  Role of Antibody Testing for SARS‐CoV‐2: Is There
One? J Clin Microbiol [Internet]. 2020;(April):115.  Lipsitch  M,
Swerdlow  DL,  Finelli L. Defining the epidemiology of Covid‐19 ‐
Studies needed. N Engl J Med [Internet].  2020;382:11946.  Avail‐
able  from:  multicohort  study.  The  Lancet Microbe [Internet].
2020;5247(20):18. Available from: Stringhini S, Wisniak  A,  Piu‐
matti  G,  Azman  AS,  Lauer SA, Baysson H, et al. Repeated sero‐
prevalence of anti‐SARS‐CoV‐2 IgG  antibodies  in  a  population‐
based  sample from Geneva, Switzerland. medRxiv [Internet]. 2020;
Available from: Long QX, Liu BZ, Deng HJ, Wu GC, Deng K, Chen YK,
et al. Antibody responses to SARSCoV‐2 in patients with COVID‐19.
Nat Med [Internet]. 2020; Available from: Wu F, Wang  A,  Liu  M,
Wang  Q, Chen J, Xia S, et al. Neutralizing Antibody Responses to
SARS‐CoV‐2 in a COVID‐19 Recovered Patient Cohort and  Their  Im‐
plications. SSRN Duan K, Liu B, Li C, Zhang H, Yu T, Qu J, et al.
Effectiveness of convalescent plasma therapy in  severe  COVID‐19
patients.  Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A [Internet].  Norman M, Gilboa
T, Ogata AF, Maley AM, Cohen L, Cai  Y,  et  al.  Ultra‐Sensitive
HighResolution  Profiling  of  Anti‐SARS‐CoV‐2 Antibodies for De‐
tecting Early Seroconversion in COVID‐19 Patients.  medRxiv  [In‐
ternet]. 2020 Jan 1;2020.04.28.20083691. Available from: Fontanet
A, Tondeur L, Madec Y, Grant R, Besombes C, Jolly N, et al. Clus‐
ter of COVID‐19 in northern France: A retrospective closed cohort
study. medRxiv [Internet].   2020;2020.04.18.20071134.  Available
from:  Lipsitch M, Kahn R, Mina MJ. Antibody testing will enhance
the power and accuracy of COVID‐19‐prevention trials  [Internet].
Nature Medicine. 2020. Available from: Kucharski AJ, Kama M, Wat‐
son CH, Aubry M, Funk S, Henderson AD, et al. Using paired serol‐
ogy  and  surveillance  data  to quantify dengue transmission and
control during a large outbreak in Fiji. Elife [Internet].  2018;
Available  from:  Ioannidis  J.  The  infection  fatality rate of
COVID‐19 inferred from seroprevalence data.  Hay  JA,  Minter  A,
Ainslie  KEC,  Lessler  J,  Yang  B, Cummings DAT, et al. An open
source tool to infer epidemiological and  immunological  dynamics
from  serological data: Serosolver.  PLOS Comput Biol [Internet].
2020; Available from: Kucharski AJ, Russell TW, Diamond C, Liu Y,
Edmunds J, Funk S, et al. Early dynamics of transmission and con‐
trol of COVID‐19: a mathematical modelling study.  Lancet  Infect
Dis Kucharski AJ, Funk S, Eggo RM, Mallet H‐P, Edmunds WJ, Nilles
EJ. Transmission Dynamics of Zika Virus in Island Populations:  A
Modelling Analysis of the 2013?14 French Polynesia Outbreak. PLoS
Negl Trop Dis. 2016;10(5).  Huang AT, Garcia‐Carreras  B,  Hitch‐
ings  MDT, Yang B, Katzelnick L, Rattigan SM, et al. A correlates
of protection, and association of antibody responses with severi‐
ty of disease.  medRxiv [Internet]. 2020; Available from: Karlson
EW, Boutin NT, Hoffnagle AG,  Allen  NL.  Building  the  partners
healthcare  biobank  at  partners personalized medicine: Informed
consent, return of research results, recruitment lessons and  op‐
erational considerations. J Pers Med. 2016;6(1):111.  Elecsys An‐
ti‐SARS‐CoV‐2 Elecsys Anti‐SARS‐CoV‐2  [package  insert].  Basel.
Roche  EDI Novel Coronavirus COVID‐19 IgG ELISA [Package Insert].
San Diego. Epitope  EDI  Novel  Coronavirus  COVID‐19  IgM  ELISA
[Package  Insert]. San Diego. Epitope Whitman JD, Hiatt J, Mowery
CT, Shy BR, Yu R, Yamamoto TN, et al. Test performance evaluation
of  SARS‐CoV‐2  serological  assays. medRxiv [Internet]. 2020 Jan
1;2020.04.25.20074856. Available from: Byrt T, Bishop  J,  Carlin
JB.  Bias, prevalence and kappa. J Clin Epidemiol. 1993;46(5):423
Krttgen A, Cornelissen CG, Dreher M, Hornef M, Imhl M, Kleines M.
Comparison of [Internet]. 2020;128(April):104394. Available from:
Borremans B, Gamble A, Prager K, Helman SK, McClain AM, Cox C, et
al.  Quantifying antibody kinetics and RNA shedding during early‐
phase SARS‐CoV‐2 infection. OSF Prepr.  Zhao J, Yuan Q,  Wang  H,
Liu  W,  Liao X, Su Y, et al. Antibody responses to SARS‐CoV‐2 in
patients of novel coronavirus  disease  2019.  Clin  Infect  Dis.
2020;122.   ahead  print  30 May 2020 [Internet]. 2020; Available
from: This work was largely funded by Brigham Health. EN is  sup‐
ported  by a CDC U01 GH002238. LB is supported by NIH UM1AI069412
and UL1TR001102. D.S. is supported by NIH K08 AR075850.  Positive
controls Asian or Pacific Islander American Indian or Alaskan Na‐
tive Other or not recorded Other or not recorded Coronary  artery
disease  Diabetes mellitus Liver disease Other immune compromised
conditions Cerebrovascular accident Age in  year,  median  Female
sex,  N (%) Race, N (%) Ethnicity, N (%) Level of care2 Intensive
care Past medical history, N (%) 2. Samples were  considered  In‐
tensive  care  if they were collected from patients that required
ICU admission at any point during hospitalization. Only hospital‐
ized  patients  provided  positive control samples, therefore the
non‐ICU fraction is one minus the proportion of ICU.  COPD Chron‐
ic  obstructive pulmonary disease Recent acute illness Upper res‐
piratory tract Bacterial pneumonia  Viral  pneumonia  Unspecified
pneumonia  Confirmed  viral  respiratory infection1 Days prior to
sample N/A Not applicable or not  available  1  Includes  Parain‐
fluenza  antigen  positive  (n=13), Metapneumovirus antigen (10),
influenza A/B antigen (8), Influenza A PCR (3), Influenza  B  PCR
(1), RSV antigen (n=5), RSV PCR (1), Adenovirus antigen (3), Her‐
pes Simplex I (DFA). Total number add up to more than 31 as  some
individuals  recorded  >1  positive  result.  No. of negative No.
testing negative Epitope IgG Epitope IgM 1. Given  limited  nega‐
tive control aliquots, the Epitope assays were tested against 230
samples, versus 232 for the remaining assays 2.  For  specificity
of  Ragon/MGH  IgM  and  IgA see supplementary materials.  3. The
Roche Elecsys Anti‐SARS‐CoV‐2 immunoassay detects IgG and  likely
IgM  and IgA; details of other isotypes are not provided by manu‐
facturer 4. Specificity of the Simoa multiplex assay Early Model.
For specificities of the Late and 12‐Parameter Models see supple‐
mentary materials.  Epitope IgG  Epitope  IgM  Days  PSO  No.  of
positve  No.  testing 1. For sensitivity of Ragon/MGH IgM and IgA
see supplementary materials.  2.  The  Roche  Elecsys  Anti‐SARS‐
CoV‐2  immunoassay detects IgG and likely IgM and IgA; details of
other isotypes are not provided by manufacturer 3. Sensitivity of
the  Simoa  multiplex assay Early Model. For sensitivities of the
Late and 12‐Parameter Models see supplementary materials.
























