Combating the Coronavirus Pandemic: Early Detection, Medical
Treatment, and a Concerted Effort by the Global Community
Zichao Luo,1 Melgious Jin Yan Ang,1,2 Siew Yin Chan,3 Zhigao Yi,1 Yi Yiing Goh,1,2
Shuangqian Yan,1 Jun Tao,4 Kai Liu,5 Xiaosong Li,6 Hongjie Zhang ,5,7 Wei Huang ,3,8
and Xiaogang Liu 1,9,10
Xian 710072, China
Changchun 130022, China
Department of Oncology, The Fourth Medical Center of Chinese Peoples Liberation Army General Hospital, Beijing 100048, China
Fuzhou 350807, China
The World Health Organization (WHO) has declared the outbreak of 2019 novel coronavirus, known as 2019-nCoV, a
pandemic, as the coronavirus has now infected over 2.6 million people globally and caused more than 185,000 fatalities
as of April 23, 2020. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) causes a respiratory illness with symptoms such as dry
cough, fever, sudden loss of smell, and, in more severe cases, diculty breathing. To date, there is no specic vaccine or
treatment proven eective against this viral disease. Early and accurate diagnosis of COVID-19 is thus critical to curbing
its spread and improving health outcomes. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) is commonly used
to detect the presence of COVID-19. Other techniques, such as recombinase polymerase amplication (RPA), loopmediated isothermal amplication (LAMP), clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR), and
advances and challenges in the rapid detection of COVID-19 by targeting nucleic acids, antigens, or antibodies. We also
summarize potential treatments and vaccines against COVID-19 and discuss ongoing clinical trials of interventions to
reduce viral progression.
The recent global outbreak of COVID-19 has led to a
public health emergency. As of April 23, 2020, over 2.6
million conrmed cases were reported to WHO from
213 countries and territories [1]. On January 30, 2020,
WHO declared the COVID-19 outbreak as the sixth public health emergency of international concern, following
H1N1 (2009), Polio (2014), Ebola in West Africa
(2014), Zika (2016), and Ebola (2019) [2]. The rapid
global expansion and rising fatalities have raised grave
concerns on the viral spread across the globe. With the
rapid increase in the number of conrmed cases, WHO
classied the global COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic
on March 11, 2020 [3]. COVID-19 can spread from
person-to-person and animal, and transmission of infection may occur with exposure to symptomatic patients
or asymptomatic individuals.
Coronaviruses (CoVs) (corona: crown-like shape) are
enveloped, single-stranded RNA viruses that belong to
the order Nidovirales in the subfamily Coronaviridae.
CoVs are divided into four genera: alpha (), beta (),
beta-CoVs infect mammals, while gamma- and deltaCoVs primarily infect birds [5]. Before December 2019,
six types of CoVs had infected humans, including two CoVs (HCoV-229E and HCoV-NL63) and four -CoVs
(HCoV-OC43, HCoV-HKU1, SARS-CoV, and MERSCoV). The rst two -CoVs (HCoV-OC43 and HCoVHKU1) mainly cause self-limiting upper respiratory infections, while the other two -CoVs (SARS-CoV and MERSCoV) are mostly associated with severe respiratory illness
[6, 7]. Full-genome sequence analysis of 2019-nCoV conrms that it is a -CoV, distinct from SARS-CoV and
MERS-CoV [8]. Investigations reveal that 2019-nCoV
shares ~80% sequence identity with SARS-CoV while
maintaining ~89% nucleotide identity to the SARS-like
CoVs (ZC45 and ZXC21) from bats [9]. A recent report
suggests that a bat CoV (RatG13) is 96% identical to
A typical CoV genome is a single-stranded, positivesense RNA (+ssRNA) (~30 kb) enclosed by a 5  -cap and 3 
-poly-A tail [11]. The genome size of 2019-nCoV is 29,891
nucleotides, encoding 9860 amino acids, with a G+C content
of 38% [12]. The 2019-nCoV genome contains two anking
untranslated regions (UTRs) on 5  - and 3  -terminals, one
single long open reading frame 1ab (ORF1ab) encoding a
polyprotein and at least ve other ORFs encoding structural
ORF (ORF1a/b) is about two-thirds of the whole-genome
length and encodes the 16 nonstructural proteins (nsp116). The other one-third of the genome contains four ORFs
encoding the spike (S), membrane (M), envelope (E), and
nucleocapsid (N) proteins, whereas other ORFs encode
while structural proteins are responsible for virion assembly
and viral infection [12, 13]. The M and E proteins are
required in viral assembly, while the N protein involves
RNA genome assembly.
The S protein, a surface-located trimeric glycoprotein of
CoVs, is the primary determinant of CoV tropism, as it
binds to the membrane receptor on host cells, mediating
viral and cellular membrane fusion [14]. The S protein of
2019-nCoV reportedly binds to angiotensin-converting
enzyme 2 (ACE2), a homolog of ACE on host cell membranes, contributing to 2019-nCoV cell invasion [15].
Moreover, this particular S protein shows a higher binding
anity to ACE2 than the S protein of SARS-CoV, enabling
2019-nCoV to invade host cells more eectively [16, 17].
Recently, a transmembrane glycoprotein, CD147, also
known as Basigin or EMMPRIN, has been conrmed as
another receptor for binding of the 2019-nCoV S protein,
thereby mediating viral invasion [18].
The E protein is an integral membrane protein that regulates viral life cycles, including pathogenesis, envelope formation, assembly, and budding [1921]. Among the four
structural proteins, protein E appears to have the highest
antigenicity and the most signicant potential as an immunogenic target, highlighting the possibility of developing
protein E-derived peptides as a 2019-nCoV vaccine [22]. Systemic studies of proteins S and E have inspired scientists to
Although some COVID-19 patients show no symptoms,
most patients have some common symptoms such as fever,
cough, fatigue, sputum production, shortness of breath, sore
throat, and headache. In some severe cases, infections can
cause pneumonia, severe acute respiratory syndrome, kidney
failure, and death. According to the WHO-China joint report
[23], on average, people infected with 2019-nCoV develop
mild respiratory symptoms and fever, 5-6 days after infection
(mean incubation period, 5-6 days; range, 1-14 days). People
over 60 years of age and those with hypertension, diabetes, or
cardiovascular diseases are at high risk for severe illness
and death. In comparison, children under 19 years appear
to be infected minimally by 2019-nCoV (around 2.4% of
all reported cases). Based on the Chinese Center for
Disease Control and Prevention (China CDC) report
(from 72,314 patient records, dated 11 February 2020),
among the conrmed cases, 86.6% of patients are 30-79
years of age, 80.9% of patients have mild-to-moderate
disease, 13.8% have a severe illness, and 6.1% are critically
ill [24]. Notably, the mortality rate of children under 19
years is 0.2%, while people aged over 80 years have the
highest mortality rate of 14.8%.
Currently, there are no eective antiviral drugs or specic
vaccines against COVID-19. Thus, there is an urgent need for
rapid detection to prevent further spread, to reduce the intensity of the pandemic, and to slow the increase in cases.
Recently, several new technologies, including LAMP-LFA,
RPA-LFA, RPA-CRISPR, and other nanomaterial-based
IgG/IgM kits, have been adopted for 2019-nCoV detection.
A signicant number of drug candidates, including chemical
drugs, biological drugs, nutritional interventions, and traditional Chinese medicine (TCM), have been proposed for
we concentrate on the most signicant developments in
2019-nCoV detection and provide an overview of medical
treatments and vaccines currently in development to combat
and contain the disease.
According to the Diagnosis and Treatment Guidelines for
COVID-19 (7th edition), COVID-19 cases can be divided into
suspected cases and conrmed cases [25]. Diagnostic
methods for 2019-nCoV are determined by the intrinsic
Spike protein (S)
E M
Nonstructural protein (nsp) 1ab
The whole-genome structure of 2019-nCoV.
properties of the virus and biomarkers that hosts exhibit after
infection. These biomarkers include viral proteins and
nucleic acids, as well as antibodies induced in response to
viral infection. The most common 2019-nCoV detection
methods include viral nucleic acid detection and serum antibody (IgG or IgM) detection. A conrmed case should have
at least one of the following criteria: (i) a positive result for
2019-nCoV nucleic acid, using real-time PCR tests from
respiratory or blood samples; (ii) a high homogeneity
between viral gene sequencing from respiratory or blood
samples and known 2019-nCoV; and (iii) serum samples
positive for IgM or IgG to 2019-nCoV, or seroconversion in
IgG, or a fourfold or more signicant increase in IgG antibody titer to 2019-nCoV in the recovery phase than in the
acute phase [25].
2.1. Nucleic Acid Targeting
2.1.1. High-Throughput Sequencing (2nd-Generation
Sequencing). High-throughput sequencing (HTS) technology
contains various strategies that depend on a combination of
Sanger sequencing method (1st-generation sequencing)
[27], 2nd-generation sequencing has been widely applied in
genome sequencing, transcriptional proling (RNA-seq) disease mapping, and population genetic studies. The wholegenome nucleotide sequence of 2019-nCoV was identied
and compared with the full-length genome sequence of coronavirus from bats [10] through HTS. HTS-based technology
is also applied to detect 2019-nCoV. For example, Wang et al.
developed a HTS method based on nanopore target sequencing (NTS) by harnessing the benets of target amplication
and long-reads for real-time nanopore sequencing [28].
This NTS strategy detects 2019-nCoV with higher sensitivity (100-fold) than standard qPCR, simultaneously with
other respiratory viruses within 6-10 h. Moreover, all targeted regions can be identied by NTS in higher copies of
samples (1000-3000 copies/mL) within 10 min, indicating
the potential for rapid detection of an outbreak in the clinic.
For 1 h sequencing data, reads mapped to 2019-nCoV differed remarkably from those of negative controls in all targeted regions at concentrations ranging from 10 to 3000
copies/mL. Importantly, NTS can identify mutated nucleic
acids. However, the NTS platform cannot readily detect
highly degraded nucleic acid fragments that are less than
200 base pairs in length [29]. Moreover, the strategy requires
tedious sample preparation and lengthy turnaround time.
Although HTS technology provides fast, low-cost DNA
DNA library preparation
Adapter ligation
Clonal amplification
Data analysis
Exon tag counting
Reference sequence
SNP detection
RNA isolation
Real-time qRT-PCR
RNA of
Probe labeled
target gene
Data analysis
Respiratory swabs
sequencing technology. (b) Steps for real-time RT-PCR analysis.
sequencing or de novo sequencing of a whole genome [30].
2.1.2. Real-Time Reverse Transcription-Polymerase Chain
Reaction (RT-PCR). RT-PCR is considered the gold standard to detect nucleic acids extracted from 2019-nCoV
specimens qualitatively. Positive results indicate infection
with 2019-nCoV. RT-PCR is an advanced technique for
coronavirus detection because of its optimized sensitivity,
specicity, and simplicity for quantitative assay [31, 32]. It
provides accurate and reliable identication for conrmed
(SYBR Green or TaqMan chemistries) for detecting double
genes of 2019-nCoV (nucleocapsid N gene and ORF1ab/E/ORF1b/S gene). This strategy usually requires four steps:
sample collection (respiratory swabs), sample preparation
(RNA isolation), one-step qRT-PCR, and data analysis
4-6 h. Recently, Roche (Indiana, USA) developed two automated cobas 2019-nCoV test systems: cobas 6800 and
cobas 8800 (approved in testing patient samples by the US
FDA), which can process up to 384 results and 1056 results
in an 8-hour shift, respectively [34]. The tests produce results
in about 3.5 h and can process up to 4128 results in 24 h,
boosting screening capacity to help restrain the sudden growing epidemic in the USA. RT-PCR is widely applicable to
2019-nCoV detection in the clinic, but limitations of this
technology are obvious, such as high false-negative rate and
low sensitivity. False-negative results may occur due to the
following factors: rst, mutations in the primers and probetarget regions in the 2019-nCoV genome [32]; second, low
viral load present in test specimens, improper extraction of
nucleic acid from clinical samples, or inappropriate restrictions on sample collection, transportation, or handling [31].
Real-time RT-PCR has been adopted as the gold standard
diagnostic approach for 2019-nCoV worldwide. However,
RT-PCR is time-consuming (4-6 h) and requires wellequipped laboratories and skilled technicians, thereby limiting full deployment in developing countries.
2.1.3. Reverse Transcription- Isothermal Amplication (RTIAMP)-Based Detection. Isothermal amplication technology
has been developed to eliminate the need for a high-precision
instrument in RT-PCR assays. This approach can amplify
DNA at isothermal conditions without a thermocycler [35].
There are mainly four isothermal amplication technologies
for nucleic acid detection: LAMP, RPA, nucleic acid
sequence-based amplication (NASBA), and transcriptionmediated amplication (TMA) [36]. In NASBA and TMA
assays, input RNA is converted to a double-stranded DNA
intermediate with a promoter region. Detection of RNA using
DNA polymerase-based amplication requires a reverse transcriptase step. LAMP and RPA do not require thermal or
chemical melting with the aid of enzymes. Combined with a
visual detection platform, such as a lateral ow assay (LFA)
or organic dyes, LAMP and RPA have been widely employed
in viral detection kits.
LAMP is a rapid, one-step amplication technique that
amplies nucleic acids with high sensitivity and specicity
at an optimal temperature of 65C [37]. LAMP processing
comprises three steps: an initial step, a cycling amplication
six primers to amplify targeted genes by creating stem-loop
F3 primer F3
Target DNA
Step 1: initiation
dNTP, Mg2+
Bst DNA
B3 B3 primer
Step 1: recombinase
binds primers
Step 2: SSB
ds to displaced strand
Step 2: Cycling amplification
Step 3: Bsu
tiates polymerization
Step 3: elongation
tal strand is displaced
and elongation continues
BIP: backward inner primer
FIP: foward inner primer
Gel imaging system
UV light
gonucleotide primers
Negative control
SARS-CoV-2 RNA
Negative control
SARS-CoV-2 RNA
Single-strand binding (SSB) protein
amplication technology. (b, c) RT-LAMP combination with SYBR Green for detection of 2019-nCoV. The signal of SYBR Green dye was
detected with a gel imaging system (b) and was visible with the naked eye under blue light (c). (d) The mechanism and process of
recombinase polymerase amplication technology. Adapted and copyright with permission (b, c) [42], medRxiv.
structures that promote new DNA synthesis using a DNA
polymerase with strand displacement activity. The two inner
primers (FIP, BIP) and two outer primers (F3, B3), along
with loop structures (LF, LB), create multiple initiating sites
in the growing DNA products, enabling rapid amplication.
LAMP is also highly specic since the amplication reaction
occurs only when the primers correctly recognize all six
regions. A reverse transcriptase step is included in the LAMP
reaction to allow RNA targets to be detected [38].
RT-LAMP oers improved sensitivity and specicity in
screening SARS-CoV, HCoV-NL63, and MERS-CoV compared to conventional real-time RT-PCR [3941]. Recently,
optimized the LAMP system through incubation at 65C for
dierent periods using a 2019-nCoV-positive RNA sample as
the template. Results require a 15 min reaction time at 65C,
and detection sensitivity is comparable to that of the
TaqMan-based qPCR approach (10 copies). RT-LAMP
employs two additional protocols for 2019-nCoV RNA
detection. Park et al. performed RT-LAMP at 65C for
40 min to identify the nsp3, S, and N genes of 2019-nCoV
using colorimetric detection [43]. The sensitivity of this
RT-LAMP assay was 100 copies of 2019-nCoV RNA. The
other RT-LAMP protocol was conducted at 63C for 30 min
to detect the ORF1ab, E, and N genes simultaneously [44].
The results conrmed the specic nature of ORF1ab and
the high sensitivity of the N gene. Based on an analysis of
208 clinical specimens, the sensitivity of this RT-LAMP was
similar to conventional RT-PCR, and the specicity was
99%. Interestingly, EI-Tholoth et al. designed a two-stage isothermal amplication procedure by combining RPA (37C)
with LAMP (63C) to detect synthesized DNA fragments of
2019-nCoV [45]. The test was performed in closed tubes
within 1 h using either uorescence or colorimetric detection.
This method has a sensitivity of 100 times better than conventional LAMP and RT-PCR, suggesting a rapid, sensitive,
point-of-care test for use at home.
RPA is an isothermal DNA amplication method that
utilizes a specic combination of enzymes and proteins
(recombinase, single-strand binding (SSB) protein, and
strand-displacing DNA polymerase) to amplify target genes
Targeted gene
T7 transcription
Cas13a detection
viral RNA
Signal release
or RT-LAMP
Signal release
Cas12a detection
ORF 1ab gene
S gene
Test band
Test band
Control band
Control band
Typical images of lateral ow readout for CRISPR-based detection at various concentrations [60].
rapidly at a constant low temperature between 25 and 42C in
as little as 15 min [46]. RPA usually requires four steps to
achieve DNA amplication: formation of a recombinaseprimer complex, strand invasion, D-loop formation (stabilized by SSB, DNA polymerization through the use of
strand-displacing DNA polymerase), and DNA amplication
gel electrophoresis, quantitatively measured using TwistAmp probes, or simply applied in lateral ow assays. Apart
from DNA target amplication, RPA formats have been
developed for the detection of RNA targets (RT-RPA) by
adding a reverse transcriptase enzyme to reaction mixtures
[48]. Because RPA- (RT-RPA-) based detection achieves
more rapid and sensitive results and operates eciently, it
has been widely adopted to detect animal and human pathogens, such as hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) virus,
human immunodeciency virus (HIV), bovine coronavirus,
or MERS-CoV [4952]. Currently, RPA has been applied to
detect 2019-nCoV, in combination with other technologies,
such as CRISPR or microuidic technology.
2.1.4. Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic
Repeat- (CRISPR-) Based Detection. The CRISPR-associated
protein 9 (Cas9) system (CRISPR/Cas9) is a revolutionary
gene-editing toolbox that can modify target genes with high
precision and that can control various types of genetic diseases in preclinical studies [5356]. Due to the collateral
nucleic acid cleavage activity of Cas eectors, CRISPR/Cas
systems have also been widely used in nucleic acid detection
with uorescent and colorimetric signals [56]. There are
mainly two kinds of CRISPR/Cas systems for diagnostics,
based on the cutting activity of Cas protein on nucleic acids
outside of the gRNA target site: the CRISPR/Cas13a and
CRISPR/Cas12a systems.
The CRISPR/Cas13a system (specic high-sensitivity
enzymatic reporter unlocking (SHERLOCK)) was developed
by Zhangs group, based on the collateral eect of an RNAguided and RNA-targeting CRISPR eector, Cas13a
and specic because it is capable of single-molecule nucleic
acid detection. Subsequently, they developed an enhanced
SHERLOCK version 2 (SHERLOCKv2) detection system
with a 3.5-fold improvement in detection sensitivity and lateral ow readout. SHERLOCKv2 has been used to detect
dengue and Zika virus single-stranded RNA or mutations
in clinical samples, showing great potential for multiplexable,
combined RT-RPA technology with the SHERLOCK system
(namely CRISPR diagnostics) to detect the S and ORF1ab
diagnostics-based test can be conducted in 1 hour and can be
read using a dipstick. The analysis is performed at 37C and
42C, and its detection sensitivity is ten copies per microliter
of input, exhibiting unique advantages, such as high sensitivity, specicity, speed, and suitability for point-of-care testing.
However, this approach needs to be validated using real
patient samples.
Unlike the CRISPR/Cas13a system, the CRISPR/Cas12a
system is based on the collateral eect of Cas12a on singlestranded DNA (ssDNA). Chen and colleagues combined
Cas12a ssDNase activation with RPA technology to create a
new approach, named DNA endonuclease-targeted CRISPR
trans reporter (DETECTR), with attomolar sensitivity for
specic detection of human papillomavirus (HPV) [61].
Recently, DETECTR was investigated to identify the nucleic
acid of 2019-nCoV. Lucia et al. applied the DETECTR
(CRISPR-Cas12a and RT-RPA) to detect the RNAdependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), ORF1b, and ORF1ab
genes of 2019-nCoV using synthetic RNA fragments as samples [62]. Remarkably, all steps of the test were completed in
1 h, and results were visible to the unaided eye. The limit of
detection for ORF1ab was ten copies/L. The advantages of
this method are its portability and low cost (~US$2 per reaction). But this proposed approach also needs to be validated
DETECTR-based 2019-nCoV detection strategy was developed by Chius lab [63]. They employed LAMP, CRISPR/Cas12, and lateral ow assay to detect the E and N genes of
2019-nCoV in clinical samples. This protocol supplied rapid
(~30 min), low-cost, and accurate (100% specic vs. 90% specic for qRT-PCR) detection of 2019-nCoV in respiratory
swab samples. Realistically, CRISPR/Cas-based 2019-nCoV
detection technology is highly specic, rapid, and low cost,
but the detection strategy also needs to be validated using
clinical samples.
2.1.5. Microuidic-Based Detection. The abovementioned
methods are based on relative quantication, because they
require external calibration with genetic standards or inner
reference DNA templates, resulting in unavoidable errors
and other uncertainties. On the contrary, methods that do
not need standard curves can provide a quantitative analysis
of nucleic acids using absolute quantication of genetic copies. Recently, digital PCR and digital LAMP have been
achieved with microelectromechanical and microuidic
technologies [64, 65].
Microuidic or lab-on-a-chip techniques use microsized
channels to process or manipulate uids. Microuidics has
been widely utilized in various elds, including drug screening, tissue engineering, disease diagnostics, and nucleic acid
detection [66, 67]. Based on its portability and ultralow sample consumption, microuidics shows signicant promises in
clinical applications [68]. Regarding nucleic acid analyses,
microuidic devices aliquot diluted nucleic acid samples into
hundreds to millions of discrete nanoliter chambers. The isolated chambers contain only one or zero target molecule
according to a Poisson distribution. Consequently, the abso-
lute copy number of target nucleic acid can be calculated
from the number of positive and negative reactions, based
on the Poisson distribution formulas [69, 70]. Both digital
PCR and digital LAMP have employed microuidics for
For instance, Ottesen and colleagues used digital PCR to
amplify and analyze multiple genes on a microuidic chip
[71]. This chip consisted of parallel chambers and micromechanical valves. The micromechanical valves segmented
chambers into independent PCR reactors after the sample
owed into chambers through connection channels. The
chip was able to detect several kinds of genes with parallel
sample panels. Digital PCR can also be conducted with droplets generated by the microuidic chip. However, the detection of uorescent signals in droplets requires special
instruments, such as ow cytometers, which may limit its
application in point-of-care testing. Additionally, the high
temperature in PCR amplication tends to evaporate the
reaction liquid (nanoliter or even femtoliter), leading to
delays liquid evaporation but complicates the devices and
increases testing costs.
Digital LAMP is more compatible with microuidics than
digital PCR because it is executed at a moderate temperature.
This simplies microuidic devices and reduces testing costs.
Many microuidic devices have been reported for nucleic acid
detection using digital LAMP, such as self-digitization chips,
self-priming compartmentalization chips, and dropletgeneration chips [7274]. As an example, Xia et al. designed
a mathematical model using the Monte Carlo method according to the theories of Poisson statistics and chemometrics [70].
The mathematical model illustrated inuential factors of the
digital LAMP assay, guiding the design and analysis of digital
LAMP devices. Based on the established mathematical model,
they fabricated a spiral chip with 1200 chambers (9.6 nL) for
at 65C without visible liquid evaporation and achieved a
quantitative analysis of nucleic acids over four orders of magnitude in concentration with a detection limit of 87 copies per
point-of-care testing.
Microuidics, combined with enzyme-DNA nanostructures, is also applied to detecting 2019-nCoV. Ho et al. developed a modular detection platform (termed enVision)
consisting of an integrated circuit of enzyme-DNA nanostructures for direct and versatile detection of pathogen
nucleic acids from infected cells [75]. Built-in enzymatic cascades in the enVision microuidic system supply a rapid
color readout for detecting HPV. The assay is fast (<2 h), sensitive (limit of detection < 10 attmol), and readily quantied
with smartphones. Recently, they adopted the enVision
microuidic system to detect 2019-nCoV [76]. Preliminary
results showed that the enVision platform is sensitive, accurate, fast (within 0.5-1 h), and inexpensive (less than $1 per
test kit). This novel platform works at room temperature
and does not require a heater or special pumps, and it uses
However, this platform needs to be further validated with real
clinical samples.
Quartz inlet
Spiral array
Glass slide
PDMS plug
introduction and partition on the chip. PDMS: polydimethylsiloxane. (c) Raw (upper) and software-extracted images (down) of the chip
after nucleic amplication. Adapted and copyright with permission (ac) [70], American Chemical Society.
2.2. Target Antigen and Antibody. As mentioned above, the
primary diagnostic methods are virological detection involving viral nucleic acids. Another approach to detection is with
serological assays that measure antigens or antibodies present in the host. Such testing provides vital information about
host exposure to 2019-nCoV and is useful for detection and
surveillance purposes. For instance, this method greatly helps
medical professionals to determine whether some recovered
patients have a higher risk of reinfection. However, the
disadvantage is that one should be cautioned that in the
early stages of COVID-19 infection, the hosts antibodies
kits. Besides, there was no proven evidence on the duration of IgM or IgG antibodies circulating in the host after
recovery. It could be merely a short time frame for detection. As such, serological tests should not be solely used
for COVID-19 diagnosis.
2.2.1. Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA). Early
diagnosis of 2019-nCoV infection is of utmost importance
both for medical teams to manage patients eectively and
for policymakers to curb the viral spread. Presently, ELISA
in cell culture extracts has proven to be the working gold
standard for laboratory diagnosis of 2019-nCoV [77].
ELISA is a plate-based assessment method for detecting
and quantifying biomolecules, including peptides, proteins,
antibodies, and hormones. ELISA techniques depend on specic antibodies to bind target antigens and a detection system
to indicate the presence of antigen binding. In an ELISA, an
antigen must be immobilized to a solid surface and then
complexed with an antibody that is linked to an enzyme.
Detection is accomplished by assessing the conjugated
enzyme activity after incubation with a substrate to produce
a measurable product [78]. Recently, coronavirus proteins
have been widely used in ELISA to diagnose SARS-CoV or
other viruses within the coronavirus family [79].
In a bold, novel approach, a team of infectious disease
experts in Singapore utilized an ELISA against 2019-nCoV
to ascertain that suspected subjects were infected with
COVID-19 and discovered the connection between two
COVID-19 clusters in the local community [80]. Using blood
samples taken from alleged COVID-19 patients, the
researchers detected antibodies targeting the spike protein
that prevented the virus from killing cells in laboratory tests.
They veried that a couple allegedly infected with COVID-19
had the disease because they had exceedingly elevated levels
of virus-specic antibodies in their blood. Interestingly,
PCR tests on the couple yielded negative results. Because
the couple had recovered from the 2019-nCoV infection,
they had no viral genetic materials in their bodies, but the
antibodies persisted. There were also other reports of using
ELISA to diagnose 2019-nCoV infection [81, 82]. Each study
conrmed the high reproducibility and specicity of ELISA
in diagnosing COVID-19 patients accurately in clinics.
2.2.2. IgG/IgM Lateral Flow Assay (LFA). Research has established that the presence of immunoglobulin M (IgM) indicates a primary defense against viral infections. This IgM
defense occurs before the production of high-anity and
adaptive immunoglobulin G (IgG) that is critical for prolonged immunity and immunological memory [83]. From a
previous study on SARS infections, both IgM and IgG
Direction of flow
Sample pad
Conjugated pad
M line
G line
Absorbant pad
Control line
antigen conjugate
Gold-rabbit IgG conjugate
Anti-rabbit IgG antibody
Anti-human IgG antibody
Anti-human IgM antibody
Control band
IgG band
IgM band
IgG IgM/ IgG
positive positive positive
of 2019-nCoV in an IgM-IgG combined antibody assay. (b) A diagram showing dierent test results. (c) Representative assay test showing
results from blood of dierent patients. Patient #13: IgM and IgG positive; #14: IgM weak positive; #15: IgM and IgG negative; #16: IgG
weakly positive; #17: IgG positive only; #18: IgM positive only. Adapted and copyright with permission (c) [84], Wiley.
antibodies could be detected in the patient blood after 3-6
days and beyond 8 days, respectively [84]. Given that 2019nCoV belongs to the same family of coronaviruses including
MERS and SARS, 2019-nCoV should also generate IgM
and IgG antibodies in infected humans. Therefore, the
detection of IgM and IgG antibodies may provide epidemiologists with crucial information on viral infection of
test subjects, allowing them to adjust policies to combat
the pandemic more eectively.
Point-of-care lateral ow immunoassays are performed
qualitatively to quickly determine the presence of 2019nCoV by detecting anti-2019-nCoV IgM and anti-2019nCoV IgG antibodies in human plasma, serum, or whole
on the lateral chromatographic ow of reagents that bind
and interact with the sample. As the sample ows through
the test device, starting at the sample pad region, the anti2019-nCoV IgM and IgG antibodies, if present, bind tightly
on the conjugated pad. When conjugated products in the
sample continue to move up the strip, anti-2019-nCoV IgM
antibodies and anti-2019-nCoV IgG antibodies bind to
anti-human IgM (M line) or anti-human IgG (G line),
respectively. No visible lines can be seen when the specimen
does not contain anti-2019-nCoV antibodies because no
labeled complexes bind at the test zone. IgG-labeled gold
bind to anti-rabbit IgG antibodies at the control line (C)
88.66% test sensitivity and 90.63% specicity in human
blood, serum, and plasma samples. Results from six patients
techniques have been used to complement RT-PCR and
antibody-antigen serological testing. These include chest
computed tomography (CT) and transmission electron
microscopy (TEM). Each has its place in diagnostic settings
and can serve as a complementary diagnostic tool to aid
medical investigators in diagnosing 2019-nCoV accurately
in suspected COVID-19 patients.
Throat swab
IgM-colloidal gold-LFA
IgG/IgM-ELISA or LFA
IgG/IgM-colloidal gold-FLA
Nucleic acid (whole genome)
Nanopore target sequencing
Synthetic RNA
Synthetic RNA
Synthetic RNA
Nasopharyngeal or
oropharyngeal swab
Nasopharyngeal or
oropharyngeal swab
Synthetic RNA
10 copies/L input
10 copies/L input
Not known
10 copies/L input
7 copies per
67%, 3.2 copies/L N/A
Not reported
Accuracy/limit of
Requiring clinical validation [250]
Requiring clinical validation [62]
Severity evaluation possible but
requiring clinical validation [249]
Requiring clinical validation [76]
Simple but requiring clinical
validation [60]
Requiring clinical validation [248]
Established standard method but
time-consuming and requiring skilled
A single, simple protocol but with
noisy signals&
requiring clinical validation [45]
High specicity but requiring clinical
validation [247]
Monitor mutation but timeconsuming and costly [28]
Inapplicable to early-stage detection
Inapplicable to early-stage detection
Inapplicable to early-stage detection
Inapplicable to early-stage detection
Inapplicable to early-stage detection&
Remarks and Ref.
assay; CRISPR: clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats; DETECTR: DNA endonuclease-targeted CRISPR trans reporter.
HTX COVID-19 test kit
Synthetic RNA
Nasopharyngeal or
oropharyngeal swab
Close-tube Penn-RAMP
Nasopharyngeal or
oropharyngeal swab
Real-time RT-PCR
Nucleic acid (N and E genes or ORF1ab/RdRp/S)
Sampling methods
2.3.1. Chest Computed Tomography (CT). In clinics, medical
imaging tools are indispensable and form an essential component of viral diagnosis, as well as for monitoring viral progression [85]. They have also been used for follow-up in
outpatient settings for coronavirus-related pulmonary disorders. Just like both SARS and MERS, pulmonary complications in COVID-19 patients have been observed. Learning
from the well-documented SARS and MERS studies, CT
imaging results in the acute and chronic periods of
COVID-19 are invariant, but not always present [8689].
Evidence is found in previous studies on SARS and MERS.
The glass opacities observed are not always found in
COVID-19 patients. Crucially, preliminary imaging discoveries indicate that COVID-19 yields nonspecic results as
well [9092]. Radiologists are presently striving to any characteristics specic to COVID-19, although present medical
information remains limited. Given the precarious situation,
there is a pressing need for alternative, complementary diagnostics. CT is one example. COVID-19 patients often
develop ground glass lung opacities [93]. As such, a CT
imaging scan can readily identify lung abnormalities in
human subjects, thereby enabling early treatment against
COVID-19. CT has demonstrated some common imaging
characteristics in COVID-19 patients. These features include
bilateral, multifocal, ground glass opacities, with a peripheral
90 patients under study presented multilobar involvement
and lesions more prominently in the lower lobes of their
lungs. Given its feasibility and ease of use, CT has become
an essential tool for the 2019-nCoV infection diagnosis.
From a radiological perspective, the advantages of using CT
imaging could expedite the rate of diagnosis. It also supports
the current shortage and heavily reliant on technical knowhow during RT-PCR testings. Nonetheless, one limitation is
that it should be cautiously utilized as a diagnostic approach
because there are no proven, evidence-based clinical benets
of using CT. It could also cause false securities if results are
negative. Other limitations include requirements of relatively
high-dose CT scans and long-term, continuous usage, which
can altogether be logistically challenging and deplete additional medical resources.
2.3.2. Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) has been used for many
years and has had a profound impact on our understanding
of illnesses, including viral infections. The thousandfold
enhanced resolution provided by TEM enables investigators
to visualize viral morphology and to classify viruses into families [94].
Mechanistically, TEM operates based on interactions
between electrons emitted from a source and materials under
examination. In the present context, it is usually 2019-nCoV
in a cellular sample [95]. The detector collects a multitude of
signals from transmitted electrons, before processing them to
reveal viral morphology and location within cells [96]. Typical specimen preparation for TEM includes sample xation,
embedding, sectioning, staining, and loading onto the TEM
copper grids [94, 97, 98]. 2019-nCoV sampling typically uses
supernatants from patient airway epithelial cells. Infected
microscopy characterizations of 2019-nCoV. (a) Cross-sectional
noncontrast enhanced chest CT radiographs of a mans lungs with
COVID-19. The gure shows enlarged lesions and increased
density of the lesions at the outer edge of the lungs (yellow
arrows) [93]. (b) A TEM image of the 2019-nCoV grown in cells
cells are xed and dehydrated before embedding in resin. A
negatively stained, lm-coated grid for examination is similarly prepared for contrast enhancement. 2019-nCoV virus
enables microbiologists to rapidly diagnose patients with a
single examination of a single tissue sample.
3. Medical Treatment
There are three general approaches to develop potential
antiviral treatments of the human coronavirus. Firstly,
standard assays may be used to evaluate existing broadspectrum antiviral drugs. Secondly, chemical libraries containing existing compounds or databases may be screened.
Thirdly, specic, new medications based on the genome
and biophysical understanding of 2019-nCoV can be
designed and optimized. Therefore, this section will discuss some of the potential 2019-nCoV therapeutics
obtained through these general approaches. Besides chemical and biologic drugs commonly used in antiviral therapies, we further elaborate on how nanomaterials,
nutritional interventions, traditional Chinese medicine,
and stem cell therapy can be potentially used for treatment
or as an adjuvant to reduce the mortality and morbidity
rate of 2019-nCoV patients. Finally, to end this section,
we highlight vaccines as a key therapeutic option to eradicate COVID-19 through herd immunity without getting
the disease.
3.1. Chemical Drugs. There are currently no approved antiviral drugs to treat COVID-19, and patients must depend upon
their immune systems to combat the infection. A full-edged
treatment plan has yet to emerge, and both academia and
pharmaceutical companies are racing to develop new treatments and vaccines to address COVID-19. Research into
the cellular and molecular pathogenesis of 2019-nCoV has
provided essential insights with the hope of developing viable
therapies. While researchers are working on cures or preventive measures for COVID-19 [99], a more robust, ecient,
and economical way to tackle the disease is to repurpose
existing drugs into a viable therapeutic strategy. Drug
repurposing, also termed drug repositioning, refers to
the process of discovering new therapeutic applications
for existing drugs. It oers various advantages over traditional de novo drug discovery, i.e., reduced cost and drug
development time, established drug characteristics, and,
most importantly, established safe dosages for human
use [100]. Repurposed drugs often negate the need for
phase 1 clinical trials and can be used immediately
[100, 101]. At present, repurposed drugs are the only
option available at treatment centers for COVID-19
patients. As COVID-19 is a viral infection, the most obvious choices for repurposed drugs come from known antiviral drugs [102]. Antiviral creation strategies focus on
two approaches: targeting viruses or targeting host cell
3.1.1. Entry Inhibitors. When an infection occurs, the virus
gains entry into a host cell by attaching itself to the host cell
between the virion surface and the specic proteins on the
cell membrane. In general, these surface proteins have other
functions but are serendipitously recognized by the virus as
entry receptors [103]. Molecules that prevent such recognition, either by competitive binding or by downregulating
the receptors, are known as viral entry inhibitors
since blocking infection early in the life cycle reduces cellular
and tissue damage associated with viral replication and production of viral progeny.
structural proteins: the S, E, M, and N proteins [104107].
The S protein is the most crucial in viral attachment, fusion,
and entry [108]. It comprises two subunits. S1 facilitates
attachment to the host cell receptor, while S2 mediates membrane fusion of the virion and the host cell. As mentioned
above, viruses have specic attachment sites. SARS-CoV recognizes ACE2 as its host receptor, while MERS-CoV recognizes dipeptidyl peptidase 4 [109, 110]. Like SARS-CoV,
2019-nCoV also targets host ACE2 [111113]. Biophysical
and structural analysis indicates that the 2019-nCoV S protein binds ACE2 with higher anity than the SARS-CoV S
protein [16]. Therefore, it is vital to target ACE2 for the
development of viral entry inhibitors.
To the best of our knowledge, not much is known about
known for treating the diseases mentioned, but these lack
inhibitory activity toward ACE2 due to their distinct
substrate-binding pockets [116119]. In brief, there are concerns that both ACE2 stimulators and ACE inhibitors can
increase the expression of ACE2, which in turn may increase
susceptibility to viral host cell entry [120, 121]. Much work
needs to be done on ACE2-targeting drugs, and controversial
issues that lie beyond the treatment pathway need to be
addressed soon.
A small antiviral molecule, umifenovir, has entry inhibitory eects on the inuenza virus. Umifenovir targets hemagglutinin for its anti-inuenza virus eect [122124].
Hemagglutinin, a viral cell surface protein, facilitates infection by undergoing a conformational change when the virus
binds to host cells [122]. Umifenovir interacts with hemagglutinin to stabilize it against low pH-induced conformational change via the formation of an extensive network of
noncovalent interactions that prevent hemagglutininmediated membrane fusion [122, 124]. It also interacts with
phospholipids by altering membrane uidity [125], which is
vital for the fusion process. This is most likely due to umifenovirs molecular interactions (bearing both the H donor and
acceptor groups) with the interfacial region of the lipid
bilayer by competing for the hydrogen bonding of phospholipid C=O groups with water molecules [126]. This renders
lipid bilayers of host cells less prone to viral fusion [125].
No studies have shown that umifenovir is eective in inhibiting SARS-CoV or 2019-nCoV. Wang et al. reported that 4
patients with mild/severe COVID-19 recovered after prescription of combined lopinavir/ritonavir, arbidol (umifenovir), and Shufeng Jiedu Capsule (a traditional Chinese
medicine) [127]. On the other hand, Dong et al. found in
an in vitro study that arbidol may eectively inhibit 2019nCoV infection at a concentration of 10-30 M [128].
Chloroquine, also a small molecule, is a quinine analog
used to prevent and treat malaria. Similar to umifenovir,
chloroquine exhibits its inhibitory eect on inuenza by pH
stabilization. Chloroquine is a weak base and becomes protonated intracellularly in a manner described by the
Cell attachment
and entry
Cell surface
nonendosomal pathway
Entry inhibitors
Budding and
Genomic (+) RNA
RNA replication
Replication inhibitors
Protease inhibitors
Rough ER
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2; +: positive-strand RNA; AP: accessory protein; E: envelope protein; ER: endoplasmic reticulum; N:
nucleocapsid protein; M: membrane protein; ERGIC: endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi intermediate compartment; S: spike glycoprotein.
Henderson-Hasselbalch law [129]. It can raise lysosomal pH
to facilitate autophagy intracellularly [130132]. Chloroquine also alters the signaling pathway of enzymes, causing
enzyme glycosylation, ultimately inhibiting viral replication
in host cells [133, 134]. Liu et al. claimed that chloroquine
could inhibit SARS-CoV entry by changing glycosylation of
the ACE2 receptor and S protein [135]. Chloroquines eective inhibition of SARS-CoV was demonstrated in vitro on
primate cells and human rectal cells [136, 137]. Hydroxychloroquine is a derivative of chloroquine with an additional
hydroxyl group. These two chloroquines share similar struc-
tures and mechanisms. Both have shown in vitro antiviral
activities toward 2019-nCoV [138140]. Hydroxychloroquine was more eective than chloroquine in inhibiting
2019-nCoV in vitro on primate cells [141]. Until now, chloroquine has shown apparent eciency and safety against
2019-nCoV in clinical trials conducted in China [139].
Currently, chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine has been
administered to hospitalized 2019-nCoV patients on an
uncontrolled basis in various countries, including China
and the USA [42]. However, it must be noted that chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine cause ocular toxicity [142].
Entry inhibitors
Protease inhibitors
Camostat mesylate
Replication inhibitors
OH OH
OH H
22,23-Dihydroavermectin B1a: R = C2 H5
22,23-Dihydroavermectin B1b: R = C2H3
protease inhibitors. (c) Chemical structures of replication inhibitors.
Hydroxychloroquine is reportedly less toxic than chloroquine, making it more attractive as a prescription drug
[135, 143]. Nevertheless, more investigation and clinical trials are needed to evaluate further their ecacy and safety in
3.1.2. Protease Inhibitors. Proteases are essential enzymes
that regulate cell life processes such as cell growth and death,
blood clotting, inammation, fertilization, and infection
[103]. Viral entry into host cells requires S protein priming
by host proteases, which subsequently enables the fusion of
viral and cellular membranes [113]. Membrane fusion
enables the release of the viral genome into the host cytoplasm, initiating RNA translation into protein. Most
viruses also encode their proteases to protect viral proteins
by modulating host cell responses. While proteases are
vital for cell life processes, they have become promising
targets for antiviral therapeutic agents. Protease inhibitors
[144]. It is noteworthy that protease inhibitors were a
major therapeutic breakthrough of antiviral drug design
in the mid-1990s for the treatment of HIV. Most HIV
protease inhibitors have found prominent clinical use
Coronavirus S proteins can be primed by a multitude of
proteases [145]. Homann et al. demonstrated that the S protein of 2019-nCoV could be primed by serine protease
TMRPSS2 [113]. Similarly, both SARS-CoV and MERSCoV can be activated by other TMPRSS family members
[145]. TMPRSS family proteases are widely expressed in the
respiratory tract [145, 146], which is likely the reason that
coronaviruses cause acute respiratory distress syndrome.
Upon successful priming, the viral genome encoding RNA
and several nonstructural proteins, including coronavirus
main protease (3CLpro), papain-like protease (PLpro), and
RdRp, are released [147149]. The single-stranded positive
RNA is translated into viral polyproteins by ribosomes in
the host cell cytoplasm. The polyproteins are then cleaved
into eector proteins by viral proteases: 3CLpro and PLpro.
PLpro also acts as a deubiquitinase that may remove specic
host cell proteins (e.g., interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)
and nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated
B cells (NF-B)), thus weakening the immune system [147,
149, 150]. Both host and viral proteases are essential therapeutic targets in the case of COVID-19.
Camostat mesylate is a small molecule that has shown an
excellent therapeutic eect for chronic pancreatitis treatment
by targeting proteases [113, 151, 152]. Camostat mesylate
primarily inhibits enzymatic autodigestion of the pancreas
[153]. In vivo studies on rats with pancreatic brosis showed
that camostat mesylate inhibits inammation, cytokine
expression, and brosis in the pancreas [154]. It has an additional clinical benet for pancreatic pain by preventing
enzyme-evoked activation of pain receptors [155]. As mentioned above, the TMPRSS family, especially TMRPSS2, is
most likely the protease targeted by a coronavirus. Camostat
mesylate inhibits TMPRSS2 activity on primate cells in vitro,
completely blocking membrane fusion between the host cell
that camostat mesylate displays an inhibitory eect in mice
for SARS-CoV infection [152]. Recent research by Homann
et al. showed a promising in vitro inhibitory eect of this serine protease inhibitor in SARS-CoV and 2019-nCoV on
human lung cells, showing potential as a viable option for
COVID-19 treatment [113]. Unfortunately, in vitro and
in vivo data for camostat mesylate against coronaviruses are
limited. More investigation is required to evaluate camostat
mesylate as a potential therapeutic against COVID-19.
Lopinavir-ritonavir is a coformulated antiretroviral drug
with excellent ecacy against HIV-1. The lopinavir has a
core molecular structure identical to ritonavir. The 5thiazolyl end group and 2-isopropylthiazolyl group in ritonavir are replaced by the phenoxyacetyl group and a modied valine, respectively, in which the amino terminus has
six-membered cyclic urea attached. In brief, lopinavir is a
potent protease inhibitor developed from ritonavir with
high specicity for HIV-1 protease [103]. It represents a
higher proportion of the coformulation. Lopinavir contains
a hydroxyethylene scaold mimicking a standard peptide
bond cleavable by HIV-1 protease [157]. This results in the
hand, ritonavir binds to HIV-1 protease, interrupting the
study from Hong Kong has shown that the combination of
lopinavir-ritonavir and ribavirin treatment for 152 patients
against SARS-CoV had an overall favourable clinical
response [159]. It has been demonstrated that lopinavirritonavir targets 3CLpro of 2019-nCoV and further indicated
that 3CLpro might also be the targets of protease inhibitors
for other coronaviruses [160]. Regrettably, a recent clinical
trial using lopinavir-ritonavir in Wuhan, China, reported
that 199 hospitalized adult patients infected with 2019nCoV did not benet from the treatment [161]. Given such
conicting clinical data, physicians must carefully weigh
lopinavir-ritonavir as a COVID-19 treatment.
Darunavir is another antiretroviral protease inhibitor
drug eective against HIV-1. Darunavir is designed for
multidrug-resistant HIV-1 protease variants, due to its
molecular structure, which introduces more hydrogen bonds
compared to conventional antiretroviral medicines. In general, changes in van der Waals and hydrogen bonding interactions between inhibitors and proteases aect the potency of
antiretroviral drugs [162]. Aside from enzymatic inhibition,
darunavir inhibits protease dimerization [163]. The dimerization of HIV protease is essential for the acquisition of its
[163]. Lin et al. claimed that darunavir inhibits 2019-nCoV.
The group has used molecular modeling to evaluate darunavir binding to 3CLpro and PLpro proteases and found targeted activity against the latter [164]. Nevertheless, the
therapeutic eect of darunavir in COVID-19 clinical cases
remains untested [164]. This may be in part due to potential
side eects, such as liver damage and severe skin rashes [103,
165]. These contraindications must be carefully evaluated if
darunavir is to be considered a potential therapeutic agent
for COVID-19.
3.1.3. Replication Inhibitors. Polymerases are enzymes essential for viral replication to produce viral progeny. Viral DNA
and RNA polymerases are responsible for duplicating the
viral genome and facilitating transcription and replication
ultimately causing chain termination during viral DNA or
RNA replication [166]. There are four types of viral polymerases in viruses: RNA-dependent RNA polymerases, RdRp,
DNA-dependent RNA polymerases, and DNA-dependent
DNA polymerases.
In the section Protease Inhibitors, we mentioned that
RdRp is released upon successful priming. RdRp is a necessary polymerase that catalyzes the replication of RNA from
an RNA template for coronaviruses [167]. Release of RdRp
from the virus initiates the synthesis of a full negativestrand RNA template to be used by RdRp to replicate more
viral genomic RNA, which eventually turns host cells into
virus factories [147]. Therefore, RdRp is an attractive therapeutic target to prevent host cells from producing viruses.
Ribavirin is a synthetic guanosine nucleoside analog that
mimics purines, including inosine and adenosine, and ribavirin has been used in the treatment of respiratory syncytial
virus [168]. It has only one ring at the heterocyclic base, compared with guanines two rings. Notably, ribavirin has a
ribose sugar moiety with a hydroxyl group at the 2  -carbon
position, enabling preferential activity in RNA-related
metabolism [168, 169]. Ribavirin inhibits cellular enzyme
and inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase involved in
purine nucleotide biosynthesis [170, 171]. Ribavirin is also
known for its inhibitory eect on viruses by forcing viral
genome replication to become catastrophically error-prone.
It is likely that as a nucleoside analog, ribavirin is incorporated by RdRp into the newly synthesized viral genome,
where it induces mutagenesis [170, 172]. Although ribavirin
has proven eective against viral infections, its mechanism
of action has not been rmly established, and there are several proposed mechanisms of action that require further validation [168, 173]. Ribavirin was initially used in treating
SARS; however, ribavirin treatment lacked an in vitro antiviral eect and caused adverse side eects including anemia,
hypoxemia, and decreased hemoglobin levels [174]. However, ribavirin was used as the primary treatment during
the MERS outbreak [175]. In general, clinical studies of ribavirin treatment for SARS and MERS did not show strong evidence of ecacy against these coronaviruses [176178].
There have been no studies of ribavirins ecacy against
COVID-19. Therefore, the use of ribavirin remains controversial and requires more investigation for a better understanding of its mechanism of action, ecacy, and toxicity,
even though it is a widely available drug.
Favipiravir is a synthetic guanine analog frequently used
for inuenza treatment [179]. Structurally, favipiravir is
closely related to ribavirin, in which it shares the same carboxamide moiety [180]. While ribavirin interacts with the
viral polymerase directly, favipiravir must be phosphoribosylated by cellular enzymes to its active form, favipiravir-ribofuranosyl-5  -triphosphate (RTP) [181, 182]. The viral
polymerase mistakenly recognizes favipiravir-RTP for a
purine nucleotide, thereby disrupting viral genome replication [181, 182]. Favipiravir has not been used against SARS
and MERS previously, but interestingly, it has been shown
to reduce viral infection of 2019-nCoV [138, 183]. In a clinical study involving 80 patients infected with 2019-nCoV,
conducted in Shenzhen, China, favipiravir showed better
ecacy than lopinavir-ritonavir in terms of disease progression and viral clearance [183]. Another clinical study
involving 240 patients with COVID-19 conducted in
Hubei Province, China, also demonstrated that those
treated with favipiravir had a higher recovery rate compared to those treated with umifenovir (preprint) [184].
More clinical data are needed to validate favipiravirs ecacy and safety in 2019-nCoV treatment.
Remdesivir is a trial synthetic adenosine analog that has
not yet been clinically approved [185]. It was synthesized
and developed by Gilead Science in 2017 for Ebola virus
infection [186]. Remdesivir needs to be metabolized into its
active form, GS-441524, to initiate its activity. The active
form of remdesivir inhibits viral RNA polymerase and evades
proofreading by viral exonuclease, causing an interruption in
viral RNA production [138, 185, 186]. It has been demonstrated that remdesivir is eective against MERS-CoV infection in vivo and 2019-nCoV in vitro [138, 187], showing great
potential as a therapeutic agent for 2019-nCoV. The drug is
currently being validated in clinical trials [188]. Given that
antiviral drugs have previously demonstrated reasonable
inhibition of coronaviruses and therapeutic ecacy against
coronavirus outbreaks, umifenovir, chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, lopinavir-ritonavir, and ribavirin have been recommended in the latest guidelines for diagnosis and
treatment of COVID-19, updated on 17 February 2020 [189].
Recent studies also demonstrated that some antibiotics
potentially inhibit 2019-nCoV replication. Anderson et al.
(preprint) recently developed the rst bat genome-wide
RNA interference (RNAi) and CRISPR libraries and identied MTHFDI as the critical host factor for viral infections
[190]. MTHFDI is a trifunctional enzyme involved in the
one-carbon (C1) metabolic pathway, participating in the cellular production of purine, dTMP, and methyl groups [191].
Anderson et al. demonstrated that purine synthesis activity of
MTHFDI is an essential activity for viral replication, making
MTHFDI a potential target for developing antiviral drugs
[190]. They further explained that an MTHFD1 inhibitor,
carolacton, restricts replication of inuenza virus, mumps
virus, Melaka virus, Zika virus, and, most importantly,
2019-nCoV [190]. Carolacton is a secondary metabolite
derived from the mycobacterium Sorangium cellulosum. It
is a macrolide ketocarbonic acid. Carolacton has been studied as an antibacterial compound against biolms of pathogenic Streptococcus mutans and growth of pathogen
Streptococcus pneumoniae [192, 193]. It has no toxic eect
against eukaryotic cells [194]. It has recently been identied
as a potent inhibitor of MTHFDI, and its mechanism of
action is presumably due to the ability of carolacton to bind
with MTHFDI [194]. More research is needed to validate
the mechanism of action, ecacy, and safety of carolacton
as a possible treatment for COVID-19. On the other hand,
ivermectin is originally a medication used to treat parasite
infestation. It comprises dierent analogs of avermectin:
22,23-dihydroavermectin B1a and 22,23-dihydroavermectin
B1b, at a ratio of 4 : 1 [195]. They are macrolide antibiotics
isolated from the fungus Streptomyces avermitilis. It has
reportedly stopped HIV-I proliferation by inhibiting interaction of the retroviral integrase protein with adapter protein
(importin), responsible for the nuclear protein import cycle
[196]. Caly et al. reported that ivermectin successfully inhibited 2019-nCoV in vitro but the mechanism of action is
unclear [197]. Since ivermectin is an approved drug, it shows
great potential as a therapeutic agent for COVID-19. In vivo
work or clinical trials need to be done to conrm its ecacy
and safety for treatment against COVID-19. Potential drugs
3.2. Nanodrug Delivery System. Nanomaterials have recently
been utilized for the treatment of diseases such as cancer
[198200] and various types of infections [201, 202]. The
ease of modication of surface properties, large surface area
[203], and multivalent interactions with targets [204] imbues
nanomaterials with massive potential as highly ecacious
COVID-19 therapeutic options. However, to the best of our
applied to COVID-19. Nonetheless, results obtained from
promising potential. For example, Fujimori et al. utilized a
treating COVID-19 with their broad antiviral properties
against a multitude of viruses, including HIV, hepatitis B
virus, herpes simplex virus, respiratory syncytial virus, and
for drug delivery. Recently, Herold and Sander demonstrated
encapsulate a stimulator of interferon gene (STING) agonist,
2  ,3  -cyclic guanosine monophosphate-adenosine monophosphate, as an adjuvant in a variety of inuenza vaccines
were activated without excessive inammation in the lung.
This could provide a considerable benet for use in
COVID-19 vaccines in the future, but as the eld is still relatively new, especially in medicinal applications, safety should
in humans.
3.3. Biologic Drugs. In addition to chemical medicines,
another vital form of therapy for COVID-19 may be the
use of biologics. Currently, interferon-2b nebulization of
100,000 to 400,000 IU/kg twice a day for 5 to 7 days is one
of the main treatments for COVID-19 in children, and it
has demonstrated ecacy in reducing the viral load during
early stages of infection [208, 209]. Another promising biologic drug is convalescent plasma, the plasma of patients
who have recovered from COVID-19 [210, 211]. Antibodies
in the donated plasma could confer temporary, passive
immunity against COVID-19, allowing patients time to
develop active immunity. Clinical trials are currently ongoing
[212, 213], and preliminary results announced from the Chinese hospitals have been promising.
On the other hand, human monoclonal antibodies or
their fragments developed in the lab have shown encouraging
results as well. Tian et al. conrmed the binding of a human
monoclonal antibody CR3022 to the receptor-binding
domain (RBD) of 2019-nCoV with high anity [214],
highlighting the therapeutic potential of CR3022 toward
COVID-19, though further in vitro and in vivo studies are
required before it could be used clinically.
3.4. Nutritional Interventions. Another supportive treatment
for COVID-19 involves dietary interventions. Various
research studies have shown supplementation of multiple
vitamins and minerals such as vitamins A, C, and D and zinc
can reduce the severity of respiratory infections [215221].
However, most of these studies targeted children below the
age of 5 who were suering from malnourishment or preexisting diseases. Therefore, vitamin and mineral supplementation may oer more signicant benets to COVID-19
patients in developing countries. Moreover, aggressive supplementation of calories and protein in nutritionally at-risk
patients has shown signicant benets in reducing mortality
[222]. Using a modied Nutrition Risk in Critically Ill
(mNUTRIC) score, Kalaiselvan and coworkers demonstrated
that 42.5% of mechanically ventilated patients have high
nutritional risks (mNUTRIC score  5), accompanied by
long intensive care unit (ICU) stays and high mortality rates
An estimated 5% of COVID-19 patients require ICU
care, and of these critically ill patients, most need mechanical
ventilation [224, 225]. Therefore, nutritional intervention
using aggressive calorie and protein supplementation may
provide substantial benets to a signicant number of critically ill patients. Evidence of such benets may be provided
by the clinical trial (NCT04274322) that is expected to end
in July 2020.
3.5. Traditional Chinese Medicine. Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) is considered a prospective supplementary
treatment of COVID-19, due to its impressive performance
in treating SARS in 2003 [226]. First, TCM shows a generalized antiviral eect through direct inhibition of viruses and
control of inammation. For example, Weng et al. reported
that the Smabucus Formosana Nakai (a traditional medicinal
herb) ethanol stem extract displayed strong anti-HCoVNL63 activity [227]. Moreover, TCM can alleviate damage
induced by inammatory reactions and immune responses
initiated by viral infections. Single and combined Chinese
medicines could mitigate the cytokine storm by clearing the
heat and toxicity in the body. For instance, TCM approaches
were adopted to prevent and treat SARS in 2003 and H1N1
inuenza in 2009 [228]. As of February 17, 2020, over
85.2% of total conrmed cases (over 60,000 cases) had been
treated with TCM, showing that TCM yields excellent outcomes. Notably, in a trial of 102 cases with mild symptoms,
TCM achieved remarkable therapeutic eects, demonstrated
Antiviral drug on malaria; not yet tested for
Antiviral drug on pancreatic diseases; not yet
tested for coronaviruses
Used in combination with ribavirin for
SARS and MERS
Camostat mesylate
Antiviral drug on inuenza; not yet tested
for coronaviruses
In vitro antiviral activities
against 2019-nCoV on
primate cells [135, 138]
In vitro antiviral activities
against 2019-nCoV in
human lung cancer cells
Preliminary studies
Genome The new antiviral drug initially developed for
In vitro antiviral activities
toward 2019-nCoV on
primate cells [138]
Potential antibacterial compound against
In vitro antiviral activities
biolm formation of Streptococcus mutans and against bat kidney cells
growth of Streptococcus pneumoniae [192, 193]
In vitro antiviral activities
Antiparasitic drug (broad-spectrum).
against 2019-nCoV on
primate cells [197]
N/A: not available. Note: coronaviruses only target SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV.
Antiretroviral drug; not yet tested for
Genome Used in combination with lopinavir-ritonavir
for SARS and MERS
Antiviral drug on inuenza; not yet tested for
Target of
therapeutic agents
Case studies
Currently being evaluated in China
and the United States
Not known
Not known
Under clinical trials
Higher recovery rate compared to those
treated with umifenovir (arbidol)
240 patients in Hubei
province, China (120
favipiravir+120 arbidol)
Currently being evaluated in China
Not known
Not known
199 hospitalized patients,
Currently being evaluated in China and
Wuhan, China (99 lopinavir
the United States. However, found to be
+ritonavir+100 standard care)
ineective based on preliminary ndings
Not known
Currently being evaluated in China
Application for COVID-19
Compared with favipiravir
by faster clinical symptom disappearance and reduction of
fever, shorter disease course, higher cure rate (by 33%), and
lower rate of moderate-to-severe cases [229]. To date, the
diagnosis and treatment of COVID-19 [25]. Since the fourth
version, a list of TCM prescriptions (including TCM soup
and TCM capsules) has been recommended for patients
based on the stage of the disease and their symptoms [230].
According to the 7th edition of the guidelines, there are
three kinds of TCM prescriptions recommended for dierent
stages of patients: the medical observation period, the clinical
[25]. Among TCM recipes, the Qing Fei Pai Du Decoction
is strongly recommended for treatment of COVID-19 by
a cure rate of over 90% of COVID-19 patients in a clinical
trial involving 701 conrmed cases [231]. Another TCM recipe, Xue Bi Jing Injection is specically recommended for
treating critically ill COVID-19 patients, because it suppresses severe sepsis, according to the China Food and Drug
Administration. It also promoted signicant improvement in
cases of severe community-acquired pneumonia (CAP)
[232]. Therefore, TCM could be an alternative prophylactic
approach to COVID-19 and a supplementary treatment in
combination with western medicine to cure COVID-19.
3.6. Stem Cell Therapy. Stem cell therapy is a promising treatment strategy for degenerative diseases, including Huntingtons disease, Parkinsons and Alzheimers diseases, and
chronic diseases such as cardiac failure and diabetes [233].
A clinical study showed that transplantation of mesenchymal
stem cells (MSCs) signicantly lowered the mortality of
patients with H7N9-induced acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), with no harmful eects [234]. As H7N9
and 2019-nCoV share similar genome structures and corresponding infection mechanisms, as well as related clinical
symptoms (lung failure), MSC-based therapy could be a possible alternative for treating COVID-19. Currently, stem cellbased therapy for COVID-19 is being conducted by dierent
hospitals in China. Doctors from Baoshan Hospital (Yunnan
province, China) used human umbilical cord mesenchymal
stem cells (hUCMSCs) to treat a 65-year-old critically ill
woman with COVID-19. Two days after the 3rd injections
of stem cells, the woman recovered, and the throat swab test
for COVID-19 turned negative [235]. Another clinical trial
involving stem cell therapy was conducted in seven conrmed COVID-19 patients in dierent clinical stages in Beijing Youan Hospital (Beijing, China). Two to four days after
intravenous transplantation of CE2- MSCs, all symptoms
such as high fever, weakness, and shortness of breath disappeared in all seven patients without observed adverse eects,
indicating that MSCs can cure or signicantly improve functional outcomes [236]. There are at least 12 other trials using
stem cells to treat COVID-19 in China, according to the
WHO report.
3.7. Other Treatments. Vaccines are another promising treatment to prevent or cure specic viruses. Currently, there is no
eective vaccine against 2019-nCoV. Fortunately, two
COVID-19 vaccines are undergoing clinical trials. The rst
is Modernas mRNA-1273, an mRNA vaccine, which started
at KPWHRI in Seattle, USA, on March 16, 2020 [237]. It targets the spike protein of 2019-nCoV. The other vaccine, Ad5nCoV (a recombinant novel coronavirus disease vaccine
(adenovirus type 5 vector)), was conducted at Tongji Hospital in Wuhan, China, on March 16, 2020 [238]. The trial was
jointly developed and administered by CanSino Biologics
Inc. and the Academy of Military Medical Sciences. Ad5nCoV, a genetically engineered vaccine, expresses the 2019nCoV S protein using replication-defective adenovirus type
5 as an expression vector, thereby inducing a virus-specic
immune response to prevent COVID-19. There are also several other types of COVID-19 vaccines, including deoptimized live attenuated vaccines, protein vaccine, DNA
vaccine, RNA vaccine, and subunit vaccine, all of which are
new microneedle array (MNA) approach based on delivering
coronavirus S1 subunit vaccines against COVID-19. Expedited by prior experience in developing vaccines against
MERS, this approach was developed within 4 weeks and
enabled long-term induction of potent virus-specic antibody responses. Signicantly, the MNA work can be
extended to other emerging infectious diseases. However,
these will require further clinical studies for ecacy and
safety, which requires more time.
According to the 7th edition of the diagnostic criteria
[25], patients severely or critically ill with COVID-19 should
receive comprehensive antiviral treatment, including lopinavir/ritonavir, arbidol, or Shufeng Jiedu Capsule. Meanwhile,
they also need additional treatments, according to their
symptoms, including respiratory support (oxygen therapy,
high-ow nasal cannulas, or noninvasive ventilation, invasive
mechanical ventilation, or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation- (ECMO-) based therapy), circulatory support, or
continuous renal replacement therapy. The main therapeutic
approaches proposed for COVID-19 are summarized in
4. Control and Prevention of COVID-19
As the most recent pandemic, COVID-19 induces much fear.
It is highly infectious and is transmitted asymptomatically.
As such, our best options to slow and prevent transmission
are to understand the origin of 2019-nCoV, its transmission
route, and associated disease pathways and systems. Generally, a pathogen must remain viable outside the host to allow
for environmental spread [240]. Collective eects of many
biotic and abiotic factors determine the period that the pathogen can survive [240]. As of now, COVID-19 is thought to
be transmitted directly from person-to-person through liquid (droplets) and, more importantly, transmitted indirectly
via contact with contaminated surfaces. 2019-nCoV remains
viable for a fairly long period outside the human body (up to
than on copper and cardboard [241]. Therefore, aerosol
and fomite transmission of 2019-nCoV is possible, as the
Shu Feng Jie Du
Bushy knotweed root, forsythia, indigowoad root, thorowax
root, patrinia, verbena leaf, reed root, licorice
Jin Hua Qing Honeysuckle ower, gypsum, ephedra, apricot, baical skullcap
Gan Pill (
root, forsythia, fritillaria bulb, anemarrhena rhizome, great
burdock achene, wormwood mint, licorice
Xing Nao Jing
Musk, borneol, cape jasmine fruit, turmeric tuber
Xue Bi Jing
Saower, peony root, Szechuan lovage rhizome, red sage root,
Chinese angelica root
Re Du Ning
Wormwood, honeysuckle ower, cape jasmine fruit
Xi Yan Ping
May cause an autoimmune response, i.e., skin rash. Pregnant
women are prohibited from the treatment
May cause an autoimmune response, i.e., itchiness. Pregnant
women are prohibited from the treatment
May cause an autoimmune response, i.e., dizziness, chest
tightness, thirstiness, diarrhea, nausea, vomit, skin rash, and
itchiness. Allergic individuals are prohibited from the treatment
yellow A
May cause adverse reactions, i.e., skin rash, itchiness, fever,
pain, dyspnea, cyanosis, palpitations, and convulsions.
Pregnant women and allergic individuals are prohibited
from the treatment
Not recommended to be used as a precautionary measure
May cause an autoimmune response. Allergic individuals are
prohibited from the treatment. Patients with diseases, i.e.,
cardiac diseases, liver diseases, kidney diseases, hypertension,
and diabetes, and pregnant women should speak to physicians
before the treatment
are prohibited from the treatment. Patients with diseases, i.e.,
cardiac diseases, liver diseases, kidney diseases, hypertension,
and diabetes, and pregnant women should speak to physicians
before the treatment
May cause an autoimmune response, i.e., nausea. Allergic
individuals and individuals with allergic constitution are
prohibited from the treatment
Side eects are not known. Pregnant women, allergic
individuals, and individuals with allergic constitution are
prohibited from the treatment
Forsythia, honeysuckle ower, ephedra, apricot, gypsum,
indigowoad root, crown wood-fern, heartleaf houttuynia,
patchouli, rhubarb, arctic root, mint, licorice
Lian Hua Qing
Wen Capsule
Main ingredients (common names)
Huo Xiang
Patchouli, Indian buead, areca peel, perilla leaf, dahurian
Zheng Qi
angelica root, tangerine peel, platycodon root, largehead
Atractylodes rhizome, magnolia bark, pinellia rhizome, licorice
Potential TCM
Ephedra, licorice, apricot, gypsum, cinnamon twig, water
plantain rhizome, polyporus, largehead Atractylodes rhizome,
Qing Fei Pai Du
Indian buead, thorowax root, baical skullcap root, pinellia
rhizome, ginger, tatarian aster root, coltsfoot ower, blackberry
lily rhizome, Manchurian wildginger, Chinese yam, immature
bitter orange, tangerine peel, patchouli
Conrmed cases
Fatigue, fever
Suspected cases
N/A: not available.
Red ginseng, Ophiopogon, magnolia berry
Red ginseng, Ophiopogon
Storax, benzoin, borneol, musk, bualo horn, sandalwood,
agarwood, clove, nut grass, costus root, frankincense, long
pepper fruit, largehead Atractylodes rhizome, gall nut,
Sheng Mai
Shen Mai
Su He Xiang
An Gong Niu
Bualo horn, musk, pearl, realgar, coptis root, Cinnabaris,
Huang Pill (
baical skullcap root, cape jasmine fruit, turmeric tuber, borneol
Red ginseng, Chinese aconite
Shen Fu
Baical skullcap root, bear bile, goat horn, honeysuckle
Tan Re Qing
Main ingredients (common names)
Potential TCM
May cause autoimmune responses, i.e., hypothermia.
Prescription guidance is unclear
Side eects are not known. Pregnant women are prohibited
from the treatment
May cause an autoimmune response, i.e., tachycardia, skin rash,
dizziness, headache, hiccup, tremor, dyspnea, nausea, visual
abnormality, abnormality in liver function, and urinary
retention. Newborns, allergic individuals, and individuals with
allergic constitution are prohibited from the treatment
May cause an autoimmune response, i.e., anaphylactic shock.
Newborns, pregnant women, allergic individuals, and
individuals with allergic constitution are prohibited from the
May cause autoimmune response and adverse eect on treated
patients, i.e., anaphylactic shock and damage to the body
systems. Newborns, pregnant women, allergic individuals, and
individuals with allergic constitution are prohibited from the
May cause an autoimmune response, i.e., dizziness, nausea,
vomit, itchiness, and skin rash
mRNA vaccine/VLP-cocktail (S, M,
and S-RBD antigen
Tonix Pharma/Southern Research
Inactivated Vaccine
VLP Vaccine
Live attenuated virus
Pittsburg Center for Vaccine Research
Heats gp96 based
vaccine for COVID-19
DNA vaccine/horsepox vaccine
platform-S gene
DNA vaccine/measles vector
Vaxart, Inc.
Vaxart, Inc.
DNA/nonreplicating viral vector
DNA/nonreplicating viral vector,
NasoVAX-S gene
DNA/nonreplicating viral vector
DNA/nonreplicating viral vector
(VAAST); oral vaccine platform
DNA vaccine/measles vector
(replicating viral vector)
Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies
Zydus Cadila
Takis/Applied DNA Sciences/Evvivax
DNA/nonreplicating viral vector
Ad26/MVA boost
DNA/S gene
DNA plasmid
DNA/DNA plasmid,
electroporation device
Inovio Pharmaceuticals
DNA/adenovirus type 5 vector
Vaccine name
Vaxil Bio COVID-19
CanSino Biological Inc., Beijing
Vaccine type/platform
Vaccine name
Medicago Inc.
Plant-derived VLP/four structural of
rotavirus (VP2, VP4, VP6, and VP7)
Formalin-inactivated+alum adjuvanted
Deoptimized live attenuated vaccines
Protein subunit/protein
Protein subunit/protein
Protein subunit/plant-based coronavirus
Protein subunit/S1 or RBD protein
Heat Biologics/Univ. of
Baylor College of
Protein subunit/Full-length protein
Matrix-MTM adjuvant
Protein subunit/Heats gp96 backbone
to express antigen of COVID-19
Protein subunit/molecular clamp
stabilized spike protein
Protein subunit/molecular clamp
stabilized spike protein
Sano Pasteur
EpiVax/Univ. of
AJ Vaccine
Vaxil Bio
Protein subunit/S protein (baculovirus
Protein subunit/S protein
Protein subunit/li-Key peptide
Protein subunit/S protein
Protein subunit/pandemic adjuvant
Protein subunit/signal peptide
Vaccine type/platform
Imperial College London
BioNTech/Fosun Pharma/Pzer
In clinical studies. Preparing for clinical studies. N/A: not available.
Protein subunit/Drosophila S2
insect cell expression system VLPs
Protein/S protein
Self-amplifying RNA vaccine
mRNA vaccine
Vaccine type/platform
Vaccine name
Vaccine name
MIGAL Galilee
Unknown/IPAs proprietary discovery
Vaccine type/platform
HCV, RSV
TCM/herbal remedies
B & T cell
Invoke immune targeting of these epitopes
Promotes endothelial repair and reduce inammation
through secretion of soluble paracrine factors
Heart disease, Parkinsons disease, lung
cancer, type 1 diabetes, stroke
Phase 1 clinical trials for prevention of
COVID-19 infection
Eliciting immune response via host cell-expressed viral
Phase 0-1 trials for the treatment of
Binding to the receptor-binding domain of COVID-2019
Multiple randomized trials for COVID19 patients
Multiple randomized trials for COVID19
Phase 3 trials for the treatment of
Phase 3 and randomized trials for the
treatment of COVID-19
Phase 2 trials for the treatment of
Phase 2-3 trials for prophylaxis of
Phase 2-4 trials for the treatment of
Phase 2-4 trials for the treatment of
Phase 2-4 trials for the treatment of
Phase 2-3 trials for the treatment of
pneumonia caused by COVID-19
Phase 4 trials for COVID-19
Clinical status
Suppression of viremia
Invoking interferon response through exogenous
Inhibition of viral RNA replication & increased mutation
in viral RNA
Inhibits RdRp
Inhibits viral RNA polymerase
Inhibition of viral entry into host cells
Inhibition of viral maturation pathways
Proposed inhibition of 3CLpro
Proposed inhibition of 3CLpro
Inhibition of lysosomal activity and signaling pathway in
Inhibition of binding of the virus to host cell membrane
Mechanism of action
Inuenza, Ebola, SARS, MERS
HCV, HCL, melanoma
Pancreatic inammation
Inuenza A & B
Original indication
Chloroquine and
Chemical drugs
Drug names
URTI, COPD
HFMD, URTI
Original indication
Clinical status
Phase 4 trials for the treatment of
Phase 0-4 trials for the treatment of
Phase 0 trial for the treatment of COVIDSuppressing secretion of inammatory mediators
Inhibition of NF-B and MAPK-mediated inammatory Phase 0 trial for the treatment of COVIDresponses
Inhibition of NF-B and MAPK-mediated inammatory
Phase 0-4 trials for the treatment of
Aect various immune signaling pathways to have a
Phase 4 trial for the treatment of COVIDprotective eect against organ damage
Downregulates MCP-1 which decreases monocytes
chemotaxis to infection foci
Inhibition of proinammatory Th17 cells and reduced
inammatory cytokines TNF- and IL-6
Mechanism of action
Abbreviations: 3CLpro: 3C-like protease; COPD: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; HCL: hairy cell leukemia; HCV: hepatitis C virus; HFMD: hand, foot, and mouth disease; HIV: human immunodeciency
virus; IL-6: interleukin 6; INF-: interferon-alpha; MAPK: mitogen-activated protein kinase; MCP-1: monocyte chemoattractant protein-1; MERS-CoV: Middle East respiratory syndrome-coronavirus; MSC:
mesenchymal stem cell; NF-B: nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells; RdRp: RNA-dependent RNA polymerase; RNA: ribonucleic acid; RSV: respiratory syncytial virus; SARS-CoV:
severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus; Th17: T helper 17; TNF-: tumor necrosis factor-alpha; URTI: upper respiratory tract infection.
Shen Fu Injection Congestive heart failure, ischemic stroke
Lian Hua Qing
Wen Capsule
Xue Bi Jing
Re Du Ning
Xi Yan Ping
Tan Re Qing
Drug names
Respitory symptoms with/without fever
Historical epidemiology
No pneumonia
Self health motoring
No pneumonia
No exclusion
Nucleic acid
droplets, and on surfaces, in some cases for days [241].
Although there are currently insucient data on the inactivation of environmental 2019-nCoV, data from other coronaviruses can be used as a reference. However, it should be
noted that biocidal agents may only limit the survival of coronavirus in critical environments and have no ecacy for
infected patients.
Given the high transmissibility of COVID-19, its propensity for asymptomatic transmission, and its persistent nature,
conrmed patients could only be quarantined and treated in
adequately equipped facilities. This also applies to anyone
who has come into contact with these patients. As such,
contact tracing is still a mainstay for disease control. Conrmation can be achieved only when specic diagnostic
methods have been employed. Chest CT imaging is useful
as an initial evaluation for COVID-19, as CT conrmation
is often possible even before symptoms appear; therefore, it
is recommended for suspected COVID-19 cases [242]. Once
the primary diagnosis reveals abnormal chest CT ndings,
a nucleic acid test should be performed to conrm
whether a patient is infected. Once a person is conrmed
positive, tests such as C-reactive protein (CRP), complete
blood count, urinalysis, biochemical indicators (i.e., liver
enzymes, myocardial enzymes, and renal function), blood
coagulation function, arterial blood gas analysis, and cytokine levels should be performed to monitor the patients
condition [189]. Chest CT should be performed as a
follow-up to treatment as well [242]. The currently
adopted procedure in identifying potential COVID-19
On a community scale and beyond, strict controls over
human trac are essential to limiting disease transmission.
By establishing lockdowns, China has been able to bring the
crisis under control. Other nations are now following the
Chineses approach in restricting movement of residents
within their borders. As evidenced globally, social distancing
is essential to halt the spread of COVID-19. On the other
hand, individuals have the responsibilities to follow the
and to behave responsibly. COVID-19, like the past epidemics, does not recognize political boundaries, ethnicity,
or gender. The disease has challenged the economic and
medical infrastructure of the entire globe. As evidenced by
events of the past few months, the impact of the outbreak
depends upon how well we are prepared to face such a challenge. Only with time will we be able to fully evaluate the
measures that are being taken against COVID-19 today.
Previous coronavirus epidemics like SARS and MERS have
expedited the process of nding useful diagnostic and therapies against 2019-nCoV. It is of paramount importance for
all countries to share essential information about 2019nCoV to mitigate its spread. Because of this strategic
approach, research has been mobilized to rapidly develop
diagnostic methods and worldwide implementation to minimize the impact of the pandemic. Practical diagnostic tests
have aided management and contact tracing of COVID-19
cases in hotspot areas. In this regard, molecular virological
techniques have assisted the scientic community in characterizing infectious agents for years. These include qRT-PCR,
isothermal amplication, and CRISPR technology.
On the other hand, serological assays for antibodies
and antigens present essential tools to obtain valuable
information about prior exposure to 2019-nCoV and the
prevalence of infection. These include ELISA and LFA
technologies. Serological screening also enables novel vaccines to be assessed and supports the design of functional
vaccine approaches. Other approaches, including chest
computed tomography (CT) and transmission electron
microscopy (TEM), can boost existing detection approaches.
Notably, there has been a marked increase in the use of both
CT and TEM to detect 2019-nCoV and other coronaviruses.
These complimentary tools reveal the progression of suspected infection, which cannot be accomplished by conventional diagnostic means. Nonetheless, there is a pressing
need for continuous development of rapid, accurate diagnostic devices and strategies to characterize unknown respiratory pathogens.
Despite these signs of progress, the present data suggest
that current public health policies and improved diagnostic
measures alone may not be sucient to eradicate COVID19 in the short term. Ecacious and novel treatments are
desperately required. Presently, large numbers of ongoing
clinical trials of various drugs may succeed in minimizing
morbidity and mortality. We have highlighted several of
may require more time to demonstrate usefulness. While
some drug candidates appear promising and have been used
in treating COVID-19 patients in desperation, it does not
necessarily mean that they are proven safe and ecacious
in the long run. As such, stringent criteria must be established by health regulatory agencies. However, in the long
term, vaccines and prophylactics may be required to curb
the spread of 2019-nCoV.
Conflicts of Interest
This work was supported by the Singapore Ministry of
Education (MOE2017-T2-2-110); Agency for Science,
Technology and Research (ASTAR) (A1883c0011 and
A1983c0038); National Research Foundation, Prime Ministers Oce, Singapore, under the NRF Investigatorship
programme (Award No. NRF-NRFI05-2019-0003); and
National Natural Science Foundation of China (21771135).
[1] WHO, Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak situation,
[2] WHO, 2019-nCoV outbreak is an emergency of international
[3] WHO, WHO Director-General's opening remarks at the
[4] P. C. Woo, S. K. Lau, C. C. Yip, Y. Huang, and K. Y. Yuen,
More and more coronaviruses: human coronavirus
HKU1, Viruses, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 5771, 2009.
[5] P. C. Woo, S. K. Lau, C. S. Lam et al., Discovery of seven
novel Mammalian and avian coronaviruses in the genus
deltacoronavirus supports bat coronaviruses as the gene
source of alphacoronavirus and betacoronavirus and avian
coronaviruses as the gene source of gammacoronavirus and
[6] P. C. Y. Woo, S. K. P. Lau, C. M. Chu et al., Characterization
Virology, vol. 79, no. 2, pp. 884895, 2005.
[7] J. Peiris, S. T. Lai, L. L. Poon et al., Coronavirus as a possible
cause of severe acute respiratory syndrome, The Lancet,
vol. 361, no. 9366, pp. 13191325, 2003.
[8] N. Zhu, D. Zhang, W. Wang et al., A novel coronavirus from
patients with pneumonia in China, 2019, The New England
[9] L. E. Gralinski and V. D. Menachery, Return of the coronavirus: 2019-nCoV, Viruses, vol. 12, no. 2, p. 135, 2020.
[10] P. Zhou, X. L. Yang, X. G. Wang et al., A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin, Nature, vol. 579, no. 7798, pp. 270273, 2020.
[11] A. Wu, Y. Peng, B. Huang et al., Genome composition
and divergence of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV)
originating in China, Cell Host & Microbe, vol. 27,
no. 3, pp. 325328, 2020.
[12] J. F.-W. Chan, K. H. Kok, Z. Zhu et al., Genomic characterization of the 2019 novel human-pathogenic coronavirus isolated from a patient with atypical pneumonia after visiting
Wuhan, Emerging Microbes & Infections, vol. 9, no. 1,
[13] Y. Chen, Q. Liu, and D. Guo, Emerging coronaviruses:
Medical Virology, vol. 92, no. 4, pp. 418423, 2020.
[14] J. Wang, S. Zhao, M. Liu et al., ACE2 expression by colonic
epithelial cells is associated with viral infection, immunity
and energy metabolism, medRxiv, 2020.
[15] X. Zou, K. Chen, J. Zou, P. Han, J. Hao, and Z. Han, Singlecell RNA-seq data analysis on the receptor ACE2 expression
reveals the potential risk of dierent human organs vulnerable to 2019-nCoV infection, Frontiers of Medicine, vol. 14,
[16] D. Wrapp, N. Wang, K. S. Corbett et al., Cryo-EM structure
of the 2019-nCoV spike in the prefusion conformation,
Science, vol. 367, no. 6483, pp. 12601263, 2020.
[17] R. Yan, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, L. Xia, Y. Guo, and Q. Zhou,
Structural basis for the recognition of SARS-CoV-2 by
full-length human ACE2, Science, vol. 367, no. 6485,
[18] K. Wang, W. Chen, Y.-S. Zhou et al., SARS-CoV-2 invades
host cells via a novel route: CD147-spike protein, bioRxiv,
[19] P. Venkatagopalan, S. M. Daskalova, L. A. Lopez, K. A.
Dolezal, and B. G. Hogue, Coronavirus envelope (E) protein remains at the site of assembly, Virology, vol. 478,
[20] J. L. Nieto-Torres, M. L. DeDiego, E. lvarez et al., Subcellular location and topology of severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus envelope protein, Virology, vol. 415,
no. 2, pp. 6982, 2011.
T. R. Ruch and C. E. Machamer, A single polar residue and
distinct membrane topologies impact the function of the
infectious bronchitis coronavirus E protein, PLoS Pathogens,
M. I. Abdelmageed, A. H. Abdelmoneim, M. I. Mustafa et al.,
Design of multi epitope-based peptide vaccine against E protein of human 2019-nCoV: an immunoinformatics approach,
V. Surveillances, The epidemiological characteristics of an
outbreak of 2019 novel coronavirus diseases (COVID-19)China, 2020, China CDC Weekly, vol. 2, pp. 113122,
E. J. Strobel, A. M. Yu, and J. B. Lucks, High-throughput
vol. 19, no. 10, pp. 615634, 2018.
F. Sanger, S. Nicklen, and A. R. Coulson, DNA sequencing
with chain-terminating inhibitors, Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
vol. 74, no. 12, pp. 54635467, 1977.
M. Wang, A. Fu, B. Hu et al., Nanopore target sequencing for
accurate and comprehensive detection of SARS-CoV-2 and
other respiratory viruses, MedRxiv, 2020.
S. Wei, Z. R. Weiss, and Z. Williams, Rapid multiplex
small DNA sequencing on the MinION nanopore sequencing platform, G3: Genes, Genomes, Genetics, vol. 8, no. 5,
R. H. Nilsson, S. Anslan, M. Bahram, C. Wurzbacher,
P. Baldrian, and L. Tedersoo, Mycobiome diversity: highthroughput sequencing and identication of fungi, Nature
Pharmaceutical Analysis, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 97101, 2020.
A. Tahamtan and A. Ardebili, Real-time RT-PCR in
COVID-19 detection: issues aecting the results, Expert
T. Nolan, R. E. Hands, and S. A. Bustin, Quantication of
mRNA using real-time RT-PCR, Nature Protocols, vol. 1,
no. 3, pp. 15591582, 2006.
Roche's cobas, SARS-CoV-2 test to detect novel coronavirus
P. Gill and A. Ghaemi, Nucleic acid isothermal amplication
Acids, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 224243, 2008.
P. Craw and W. Balachandran, Isothermal nucleic acid
amplication technologies for point-of-care diagnostics: a
Chemotherapy, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 6269, 2009.
[38] C. Li, Q. Ying, X. Su, and T. Li, Development and application
of reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplication for detecting live Shewanella putrefaciens in preserved
pp. M226M230, 2012.
[39] J. H. Kim, M. Kang, E. Park, D. R. Chung, J. Kim, and
E. S. Hwang, A simple and multiplex loop-mediated isothermal amplication (LAMP) assay for rapid detection
[40] P. Huang, H. Wang, Z. Cao et al., A rapid and specic assay
for the detection of MERS-CoV, Frontiers in Microbiology,
vol. 9, p. 1101, 2018.
[41] K. Pyrc, A. Milewska, and J. Potempa, Development of loopmediated isothermal amplication assay for detection of
vol. 175, no. 1, pp. 133136, 2011.
[42] L. Yu, S. Wu, X. Hao et al., Rapid colorimetric detection of
COVID-19 coronavirus using a reverse tran-scriptional loopmediated isothermal amplication (RT-LAMP) diagnostic
plat-form: iLACO, MedRxiv, 2020.
[43] G.-S. Park, K. Ku, S. H. Baek et al., Development of Reverse
Transcription Loop-Mediated Isothermal Amplication
[44] W. Yang, X. Dang, Q. Wang et al., Rapid detection of
SARS-CoV-2 using reverse transcription RT-LAMP method,
[45] M. El-Tholoth, H. H. Bau, and J. Song, A Single and TwoStage, Closed-Tube, Molecular test for the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) at home, clinic, and points of entry,
[46] B. Babu, F. M. Ochoa-Corona, and M. L. Paret, Recombinase
polymerase amplication applied to plant virus detection and
potential implications, Analytical Biochemistry, vol. 546,
[47] I. M. Lobato and C. K. O'Sullivan, Recombinase polymerase amplication: basics, applications and recent advances,
Trac Trends in Analytical Chemistry, vol. 98, pp. 1935,
reverse transcription recombinase polymerase amplication
assay for rapid detection of foot-and-mouth disease virus,
[49] D. S. Boyle, D. A. Lehman, L. Lillis et al., Rapid detection
of HIV-1 proviral DNA for early infant diagnosis using
recombinase polymerase amplication, MBio, vol. 4,
[50] H. M. Amer, A. Abd el Wahed, M. A. Shalaby, F. N.
Almajhdi, F. T. Hufert, and M. Weidmann, A new
approach for diagnosis of bovine coronavirus using a
reverse transcription recombinase polymerase amplication
[51] A. A. El Wahed, P. Patel, D. Heidenreich, F. T. Hufert,
and M. Weidmann, Reverse transcription recombinase
polymerase amplication assay for the detection of Middle
East respiratory syndrome coronavirus, PLoS Currents,
T. Yan, X. N. Li, L. Wang et al., Development of a reverse
transcription recombinase-aided amplication assay for the
detection of coxsackievirus A10 and coxsackievirus A6
RNA, Archives of Virology, vol. 163, no. 6, pp. 1455
L. Cong, F. A. Ran, D. Cox et al., Multiplex genome engineering using CRISPR/Cas systems, Science, vol. 339,
no. 6121, pp. 819823, 2013.
P. D. Hsu, E. S. Lander, and F. Zhang, Development and
applications of CRISPR-Cas9 for genome engineering, Cell,
vol. 157, no. 6, pp. 12621278, 2014.
D. Cyranoski, CRISPR gene-editing tested in a person for
the rst time, Nature, vol. 539, no. 7630, p. 479, 2016.
H. Rezaei, S. khadempar, N. Farahani et al., Harnessing
CRISPR/Cas9 technology in cardiovascular disease, Trends
in Cardiovascular Medicine, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 93101, 2020.
J. S. Gootenberg, O. O. Abudayyeh, J. W. Lee et al., Nucleic
acid detection with CRISPR-Cas13a/C2c2, Science,
vol. 356, no. 6336, pp. 438442, 2017.
M. J. Kellner, J. G. Koob, J. S. Gootenberg, O. O. Abudayyeh,
and F. Zhang, SHERLOCK: nucleic acid detection with
CRISPR nucleases, Nature Protocols, vol. 14, no. 10,
J. S. Gootenberg, O. O. Abudayyeh, M. J. Kellner, J. Joung, J. J.
detection platform with Cas13, Cas12a, and Csm6, Science,
vol. 360, no. 6387, pp. 439444, 2018.
F. Zhang, O. O. Abudayyeh, and S. G. Jonathan, SHERLOCK,
J. S. Chen, E. Ma, L. B. Harrington et al., CRISPR-Cas12a
target binding unleashes indiscriminate single-stranded
DNase activity, Science, vol. 360, no. 6387, pp. 436439,
detection method based on CRISPR-Cas12, BioRxiv, 2020.
J. P. Broughton, X. Deng, G. Yu et al., CRISPR-Cas12-based
detection of SARS-CoV-2, Nature Biotechnology, pp. 15,
B. Vogelstein and K. W. Kinzler, Digital PCR, Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, vol. 96, no. 16, pp. 92369241, 1999.
D. Kim, Q. Wei, J. E. Kong, A. Ozcan, and D. Di Carlo,
Research highlights: digital assays on chip, Lab on a Chip,
vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1722, 2015.
P. S. Dittrich and A. Manz, Lab-on-a-chip: microuidics in
no. 3, pp. 210218, 2006.
G. M. Whitesides, The origins and the future of microuidics, Nature, vol. 442, no. 7101, pp. 368373, 2006.
E. K. Sackmann, A. L. Fulton, and D. J. Beebe, The present
and future role of microuidics in biomedical research,
Nature, vol. 507, no. 7491, pp. 181189, 2014.
J. E. Kreutz, T. Munson, T. Huynh, F. Shen, W. du, and R. F.
Ismagilov, Theoretical design and analysis of multivolume
digital assays with wide dynamic range validated experimen-
tally with microuidic digital PCR, Analytical Chemistry,
vol. 83, no. 21, pp. 81588168, 2011.
Y. Xia, S. Yan, X. Zhang et al., Monte Carlo modeling-based
digital loop-mediated isothermal amplication on a spiral
chip for absolute quantication of nucleic acids, Analytical
Chemistry, vol. 89, no. 6, pp. 37163723, 2017.
E. A. Ottesen, J. W. Hong, S. R. Quake, and J. R. Leadbetter,
Microuidic digital PCR enables multigene analysis of individual environmental bacteria, Science, vol. 314, no. 5804,
A. Gansen, A. M. Herrick, I. K. Dimov, L. P. Lee, and D. T.
Chiu, Digital LAMP in a sample self-digitization (SD) chip,
Lab on a Chip, vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 22472254, 2012.
Q. Zhu, Y. Gao, B. Yu et al., Self-priming compartmentalization digital LAMP for point-of-care, Lab on a Chip, vol. 12,
no. 22, pp. 47554763, 2012.
T. D. Rane, L. Chen, H. C. Zec, and T.-H. Wang, Microuidic continuous ow digital loop-mediated isothermal
amplication (LAMP), Lab on a Chip, vol. 15, no. 3,
N. R. Y. Ho, G. S. Lim, N. R. Sundah, D. Lim, T. P. Loh, and
H. Shao, Visual and modular detection of pathogen nucleic
acids with enzyme-DNA molecular complexes, Nature
Communications, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 32113238, 2018.
NUSnews, NUS scientists work on COVID-19 vaccine trial
S. K. P. Lau, P. C. Y. Woo, B. H. L. Wong et al., Detection of
no. 7, pp. 28842889, 2004.
P. C. Y. Woo, S. K. P. Lau, B. H. L. Wong et al., Dierential sensitivities of severe acute respiratory syndrome
(SARS) coronavirus spike polypeptide enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and SARS coronavirus
nucleocapsid protein ELISA for serodiagnosis of SARS
vol. 43, no. 7, pp. 30543058, 2005.
N. Dennis, Singapore claims rst use of antibody test to track
C. Wang, W. Li, D. Drabek et al., A human monoclonal antibody blocking SARS-CoV-2 infection, BioRxiv, 2020.
W. Zhang, R. H. du, B. Li et al., Molecular and serological
investigation of 2019-nCoV infected patients: implication of
multiple shedding routes, Emerging Microbes & Infections,
vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 386389, 2020.
R. Racine and G. M. Winslow, IgM in microbial infections:
taken for granted?, Immunology Letters, vol. 125, no. 2,
Z. Li, Y. Yi, X. Luo et al., Development and clinical application of a rapid IgM-IgG combined antibody test for
M. Hosseiny, S. Kooraki, A. Gholamrezanezhad, S. Reddy,
and L. Myers, Radiology perspective of coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19): lessons from severe acute respiratory syndrome and Middle East respiratory syndrome,
L. Ketai, N. S. Paul, and K. T. Wong, Radiology of severe
acute respiratory syndrome (SARS): the emerging
pathologic-radiologic correlates of an emerging disease,
K. M. Das, E. Y. Lee, R. D. Langer, and S. G. Larsson, Middle
vol. 206, no. 6, pp. 11931201, 2016.
K. M. Das, E. Y. Lee, R. Singh et al., Follow-up chest radiographic ndings in patients with MERS-CoV after recovery,
G. E. Antonio, K. T. Wong, E. L. H. Tsui et al., Chest radiograph scores as potential prognostic indicators in severe acute
M. Chung, A. Bernheim, X. Mei et al., CT imaging features
of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), Radiology,
vol. 295, no. 1, pp. 202207, 2020.
J. F.-W. Chan, S. Yuan, K. H. Kok et al., A familial cluster
of pneumonia associated with the 2019 novel coronavirus
indicating person-to-person transmission: a study of a
family cluster, The Lancet, vol. 395, no. 10223, pp. 514
P. Liu and X. Z. Tan, 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV)
pneumonia, Radiology, vol. 295, no. 1, p. 19, 2020.
The Guardian, What happens to people's lungs when they get
A. Curry, H. Appleton, and B. Dowsett, Application of
transmission electron microscopy to the clinical study of viral
and bacterial infections: present and future, Micron, vol. 37,
no. 2, pp. 91106, 2006.
X. Liu, R. Deng, Y. Zhang et al., Probing the nature of
upconversion nanocrystals: instrumentation matters,
R. Fernandez-Leiro and S. H. W. Scheres, Unravelling biological macromolecules with cryo-electron microscopy,
Nature, vol. 537, no. 7620, pp. 339346, 2016.
M. K. Monninger, C. A. Nguessan, C. D. Blancett et al.,
Preparation of viral samples within biocontainment for
Methods, vol. 238, pp. 7076, 2016.
R. Xiong, L. Zhang, S. Li et al., Novel and potent inhibitors targeting DHODH, a rate-limiting enzyme in de novo pyrimidine
biosynthesis, are broad-spectrum antiviral against RNA
viruses including newly emerged coronavirus SARS-CoV-2,
J. W. Astin, P. Keerthisinghe, L. Du, L. E. Sanderson, K. E.
Crosier, and C. J. Hall, Innate immune cells and bacterial
infection in zebrash, in Methods in Cell Biology, H. W. Det-
rich, M. Westereld, and L. I. Zon, Eds., vol. 138, pp. 3160,
Academic Press, 2017.
T. I. Oprea, J. E. Bauman, C. G. Bologa et al., Drug repurposing from an academic perspective, Drug Discovery Today:
Therapeutic Strategies, vol. 8, no. 3-4, pp. 6169, 2011.
A. Pizzorno, B. Padey, O. Terrier, and M. Rosa-Calatrava,
Drug repurposing approaches for the treatment of inuenza viral infection: reviving old drugs to ght against a
long-lived enemy, Frontiers in Immunology, vol. 10,
R. Vardanyan and V. Hruby, Chapter 34 - Antiviral Drugs,
in Synthesis of Best-Seller Drugs, R. Vardanyan and V. Hruby,
Eds., pp. 687736, Academic Press, 2016.
W. Tai, L. He, X. Zhang et al., Characterization of the
receptor-binding domain (RBD) of 2019 novel coronavirus:
implication for development of RBD protein as a viral
attachment inhibitor and vaccine, Cellular & Molecular
N. Wang, J. Shang, S. Jiang, and L. Du, Subunit vaccines
against emerging pathogenic human coronaviruses, Frontiers in Microbiology, vol. 11, 2020.
L. Du, W. Tai, Y. Zhou, and S. Jiang, Vaccines for the
prevention against the threat of MERS-CoV, Expert
Y. Zhou, S. Jiang, and L. Du, Prospects for a MERS-CoV
S. Belouzard, J. K. Millet, B. N. Licitra, and G. R. Whittaker,
Mechanisms of coronavirus cell entry mediated by the viral
spike protein, Viruses, vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 10111033, 2012.
W. Li, M. J. Moore, N. Vasilieva et al., Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 is a functional receptor for the SARS coronavirus, Nature, vol. 426, no. 6965, pp. 450454, 2003.
V. S. Raj, H. Mou, S. L. Smits et al., Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 is
a functional receptor for the emerging human coronavirusEMC, Nature, vol. 495, no. 7440, pp. 251254, 2013.
Y. Chen, Y. Guo, Y. Pan, and Z. J. Zhao, Structure analysis of the receptor binding of 2019-nCoV, Biochemical
and Biophysical Research Communications, vol. 525,
no. 1, pp. 135140, 2020.
M. Letko, A. Marzi, and V. Munster, Functional assessment
of cell entry and receptor usage for SARS-CoV-2 and other
lineage B betacoronaviruses, Nature Microbiology, vol. 5,
no. 4, pp. 562569, 2020.
M. Homann, H. Kleine-Weber, S. Schroeder et al., SARSCoV-2 cell entry depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and is
blocked by a clinically proven protease inhibitor, Cell,
vol. 181, no. 2, pp. 271280.e8, 2020.
M. J. Huentelman, J. Zubcevic, J. A. Hernndez Prada et al.,
Structure-based discovery of a novel angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 inhibitor, Hypertension, vol. 44, no. 6,
T. Qaradakhi, L. K. Gadanec, K. R. McSweeney et al., The
potential actions of angiotensin converting enzyme II
(ACE2) activator diminazene aceturate (DIZE) in various
diseases, Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology and Physiology, vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 751758, 2020.
M. A. R. Chamsi-Pasha, Z. Shao, and W. H. W. Tang,
Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 as a therapeutic target
for heart failure, Current Heart Failure Reports, vol. 11,
no. 1, pp. 5863, 2014.
[117] L. P. Hasvold, J. Bodegrd, M. Thuresson et al., Diabetes and
CVD risk during angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or
angiotensin II receptor blocker treatment in hypertension: a
vol. 28, no. 11, pp. 663669, 2014.
[118] W. B. White, C. Wilson, G. Bakris et al., Ace inhibitor use
and major cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes treated
[119] G. I. Rice, D. A. Thomas, P. J. Grant, A. J. Turner, and N. M.
Hooper, Evaluation of angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE), its homologue ACE2 and neprilysin in angiotensin
[120] A. B. Patel and A. Verma, COVID-19 and angiotensinconverting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor
vol. 323, no. 18, pp. 17491862, 2020.
[121] L. Fang, G. Karakiulakis, and M. Roth, Are patients with
hypertension and diabetes mellitus at increased risk for
COVID-19 infection?, The Lancet Respiratory Medicine,
[122] R. U. Kadam and I. A. Wilson, Structural basis of inuenza
virus fusion inhibition by the antiviral drug Arbidol, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, vol. 114, no. 2, pp. 206214, 2017.
[123] Z. Shen, K. Lou, and W. Wang, New small-molecule drug
design strategies for ghting resistant inuenza A, Acta
Pharmaceutica Sinica B, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 419430, 2015.
[124] I. A. Leneva, R. J. Russell, Y. S. Boriskin, and A. J. Hay,
Characteristics of arbidol-resistant mutants of inuenza
virus: implications for the mechanism of anti-inuenza
action of arbidol, Antiviral Research, vol. 81, no. 2,
[125] E. Teissier, G. Zandomeneghi, A. Loquet et al., Mechanism
[126] J. Villalan, Membranotropic eects of arbidol, a broad antiviral molecule, on phospholipid model membranes, The
[127] Z. Wang, X. Chen, Y. Lu, F. Chen, and W. Zhang, Clinical
characteristics and therapeutic procedure for four cases
with 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia receiving combined
Chinese and Western medicine treatment, BioScience
Trends, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 6468, 2020.
[128] L. Dong, S. Hu, and J. Gao, Discovering drugs to treat
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), Drug Discoveries
& Therapeutics, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 5860, 2020.
[129] A. Savarino, J. R. Boelaert, A. Cassone, G. Majori, and
R. Cauda, Eects of chloroquine on viral infections: an old
drug against today's diseases, The Lancet Infectious Diseases,
vol. 3, no. 11, pp. 722727, 2003.
Cell Biology, vol. 90, no. 3, pp. 665669, 1981.
[131] E. Schrezenmeier and T. Drner, Mechanisms of action of
[132] M. Mauthe, I. Orhon, C. Rocchi et al., Chloroquine
inhibits autophagic ux by decreasing autophagosomelysosome fusion, Autophagy, vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 1435
[133] A. Savarino, L. Di Trani, I. Donatelli, R. Cauda, and
A. Cassone, New insights into the antiviral eects of chloroquine, The Lancet Infectious Diseases, vol. 6, no. 2,
[134] A. Savarino, M. B. Lucia, E. Rastrelli et al., Anti-HIV eects
Acquired Immune Deciency Syndromes, vol. 35, no. 3,
[135] J. Liu, R. Cao, M. Xu et al., Hydroxychloroquine, a less
toxic derivative of chloroquine, is eective in inhibiting
SARS-CoV-2 infection in vitro, Cell Discovery, vol. 6,
no. 1, p. 16, 2020.
[136] M. J. Vincent, E. Bergeron, S. Benjannet et al., Chloroquine
is a potent inhibitor of SARS coronavirus infection and
[137] E. Keyaerts, L. Vijgen, P. Maes, J. Neyts, and M. V. Ranst, In
vitro inhibition of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus by chloroquine, Biochemical and Biophysical Research
Communications, vol. 323, no. 1, pp. 264268, 2004.
[138] M. Wang, R. Cao, L. Zhang et al., Remdesivir and chloroquine eectively inhibit the recently emerged novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in vitro, Cell Research, vol. 30, no. 3,
[139] J. Gao, Z. Tian, and X. Yang, Breakthrough: chloroquine
phosphate has shown apparent ecacy in treatment of
COVID-19 associated pneumonia in clinical studies, BioScience Trends, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 72-73, 2020.
[140] P. Colson, J.-M. Rolain, J.-C. Lagier, P. Brouqui, and
[141] X. Yao, F. Ye, M. Zhang et al., In vitro antiviral activity and
projection of optimized dosing design of hydroxychloroquine
for the treatment of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), Clinical Infectious Diseases,
[142] S. Pasadhika and G. A. Fishman, Eects of chronic exposure
to hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine on inner retinal structures, Eye, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 340346, 2010.
[143] E. W. McChesney, Animal toxicity and pharmacokinetics
Medicine, vol. 75, no. 1, pp. 1118, 1983.
[144] J. Konvalinka, H.-G. Krusslich, and B. Mller, Retroviral
proteases and their roles in virion maturation, Virology,
vol. 479-480, pp. 403417, 2015.
[145] J. K. Millet and G. R. Whittaker, Host cell proteases: critical
determinants of coronavirus tropism and pathogenesis,
Virus Research, vol. 202, pp. 120134, 2015.
[146] S. Bertram, A. Heurich, H. Lavender et al., Inuenza and
SARS-coronavirus activating proteases TMPRSS2 and HAT
are expressed at multiple sites in human respiratory and
[147] C. Liu, Q. Zhou, Y. Li et al., Research and development on
therapeutic agents and vaccines for COVID-19 and related
human coronavirus diseases, ACS Central Science, vol. 6,
no. 3, pp. 315331, 2020.
J. Ziebuhr, E. J. Snijder, and A. E. Gorbalenya, Virusencoded proteinases and proteolytic processing in the
Y. M. Bez-Santos, S. E. St John, and A. D. Mesecar, The
SARS-coronavirus papain-like protease: structure, function
and inhibition by designed antiviral compounds, Antiviral
Research, vol. 115, pp. 2138, 2015.
T.-W. Lee, M. M. Cherney, C. Huitema et al., Crystal Structures of the Main Peptidase from the SARS Coronavirus
of Molecular Biology, vol. 353, no. 5, pp. 11371151, 2005.
M. Kawase, K. Shirato, L. van der Hoek, F. Taguchi, and
S. Matsuyama, Simultaneous treatment of human bronchial
epithelial cells with serine and cysteine protease inhibitors
prevents severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
Y. Zhou, P. Vedantham, K. Lu et al., Protease inhibitors targeting coronavirus and lovirus entry, Antiviral Research,
vol. 116, pp. 7684, 2015.
N. Ashizawa, T. Hashimoto, T. Miyake, T. Shizuku,
T. Imaoka, and Y. Kinoshita, Ecacy of camostat mesilate
J. Gibo, T. Ito, K. Kawabe et al., Camostat mesilate attenuates pancreatic brosis via inhibition of monocytes and pancreatic stellate cells activity, Laboratory Investigation,
vol. 85, no. 1, pp. 7589, 2005.
H. Ishikura, S. Nishimura, M. Matsunami et al., The proteinase inhibitor camostat mesilate suppresses pancreatic
pain in rodents, Life Sciences, vol. 80, no. 21, pp. 1999
K. Shirato, M. Kawase, and S. Matsuyama, Middle East
respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection mediated by
Virology, vol. 87, no. 23, pp. 1255212561, 2013.
E. De Clercq, Anti-HIV drugs: 25 compounds approved
within 25 years after the discovery of HIV, International
M. W. Hull and J. S. G. Montaner, Ritonavir-boosted protease inhibitors in HIV therapy, Annals of Medicine, vol. 43,
no. 5, pp. 375388, 2011.
C. M. Chu, V. C. Cheng, I. F. Hung et al., Role of lopinavir/ritonavir in the treatment of SARS: initial virological and
clinical ndings, Thorax, vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 252256, 2004.
B. Cao, Y. Wang, D. Wen et al., A trial of lopinavirritonavir
in adults hospitalized with severe Covid-19, The New
J. Chen, Z. Liang, W. Wang, C. Yi, S. Zhang, and Q. Zhang,
Revealing origin of decrease in potency of darunavir and
amprenavir against HIV-2 relative to HIV-1 protease by
molecular dynamics simulations, Scientic Reports, vol. 4,
H. Hayashi, N. Takamune, T. Nirasawa et al., Dimerization
of HIV-1 protease occurs through two steps relating to the
mechanism of protease dimerization inhibition by darunavir, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, vol. 111, no. 33, pp. 12234
S. Lin, R. Shen, J. He, X. Li, and X. Guo, Molecular modeling
evaluation of the binding eect of ritonavir, lopinavir and
darunavir to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
2 proteases, bioRxiv, 2020.
B. J. Eckhardt and R. M. Gulick, Drugs for HIV Infection, in Infectious Diseases (Fourth Edition), J. Cohen,
W. G. Powderly, and S. M. Opal, Eds., pp. 12931308.
e2, Elsevier, 2017.
J. Magden, L. Kriinen, and T. Ahola, Inhibitors of
virus replication: recent developments and prospects,
Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, vol. 66, no. 6,
J. Lung, Y. S. Lin, Y. H. Yang et al., The potential chemical
E. Thomas, M. G. Ghany, and T. J. Liang, The application
and mechanism of action of ribavirin in therapy of hepatitis
C, Antiviral Chemistry and Chemotherapy, vol. 23, no. 1,
S. Crotty, D. Maag, J. J. Arnold et al., The broad-spectrum
antiviral ribonucleoside ribavirin is an RNA virus mutagen,
Nature Medicine, vol. 6, no. 12, pp. 13751379, 2000.
D. Dulin, J. J. Arnold, T. van Laar et al., Signatures of
nucleotide analog incorporation by an RNA-dependent
rna polymerase revealed using high-throughput magnetic
tweezers, Cell Reports, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 10631076, 2017.
G. Koren, S. King, S. Knowles, and E. Phillips, Ribavirin in
the treatment of SARS: a new trick for an old drug?, CMAJ,
vol. 168, no. 10, pp. 12891292, 2003.
S. Crotty, C. E. Cameron, and R. Andino, RNA virus error
catastrophe: direct molecular test by using ribavirin, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, vol. 98, no. 12, pp. 68956900, 2001.
H. S. Te, G. Randall, and D. M. Jensen, Mechanism of action
of ribavirin in the treatment of chronic hepatitis C, Gastroenterology & Hepatology, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 218225, 2007.
D. Y. Tai, Pharmacologic treatment of SARS: current knowledge and recommendations, Annals Academy of Medicine,
vol. 36, pp. 438443, 2007.
J. Dyall, R. Gross, J. Kindrachuk et al., Middle East respiratory syndrome and severe acute respiratory syndrome: current therapeutic options and potential targets for novel
therapies, Drugs, vol. 77, no. 18, pp. 19351966, 2017.
J. A. Al-Tawq, H. Momattin, J. Dib, and Z. A. Memish,
Ribavirin and interferon therapy in patients infected with
vol. 20, pp. 4246, 2014.
H. Momattin, K. Mohammed, A. Zumla, Z. A. Memish, and
pp. e792e798, 2013.
Y. P. Chong, J. Y. Song, Y. B. Seo, J. P. Choi, H. S. Shin, and
Rapid Response Team, Antiviral treatment guidelines for
Middle East respiratory syndrome, Infection & Chemotherapy, vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 212222, 2015.
R. Abdelnabi, A. T. S. . Morais, P. Leyssen et al., Understanding the mechanism of the broad-spectrum antiviral activity of
favipiravir (T-705): key role of the F1 motif of the viral
F. Pettini, A. Trezza, and O. Spiga, A Focus on Ebola Virus
Polymerase, Viral Polymerases, pp. 181210, 2019.
Y. Furuta, B. B. Gowen, K. Takahashi, K. Shiraki, D. F. Smee,
and D. L. Barnard, Favipiravir (T-705), a novel viral RNA
polymerase inhibitor, Antiviral Research, vol. 100, no. 2,
Y. Furuta, T. Komeno, and T. Nakamura, Favipiravir (T705), a broad spectrum inhibitor of viral RNA polymerase,
Proceedings of the Japan Academy, Series B, vol. 93, no. 7,
Q. Cai, M. Yang, D. Liu et al., Experimental treatment with
favipiravir for COVID-19: an open-label control study,
C. Chen et al., Favipiravir versus arbidol for COVID-19: a
randomized clinical trial, medRxiv, 2020.
T. K. Warren, R. Jordan, M. K. Lo et al., Therapeutic ecacy
of the small molecule GS-5734 against Ebola virus in rhesus
monkeys, Nature, vol. 531, no. 7594, pp. 381385, 2016.
J. A. Al-Tawq, A. H. Al-Homoud, and Z. A. Memish,
Remdesivir as a possible therapeutic option for the
COVID-19, Travel Medicine and Infectious Disease,
T. P. Sheahan, A. C. Sims, S. R. Leist et al., Comparative therapeutic ecacy of remdesivir and combination lopinavir,
ritonavir, and interferon beta against MERS-CoV, Nature
Communications, vol. 11, no. 1, p. 222, 2020.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Information
for clinicians on therapeutic options for COVID-19 patients,
Chinese Centre for Disease Control and Prevention,
D. E. Anderson, J. Cui, Q. Ye et al., Orthogonal genome-wide
screenings in bat cells identify MTHFD1 as a target of broad
antiviral therapy, bioRxiv, 2020.
G. S. Ducker and J. D. Rabinowitz, One-carbon metabolism
in health and disease, Cell Metabolism, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 27
C. Apel, A. Barg, A. Rheinberg, G. Conrads, and I. WagnerDbler, Dental composite materials containing carolacton
inhibit biolm growth of Streptococcus mutans, Dental
Materials, vol. 29, no. 11, pp. 11881199, 2013.
J. Donner, M. Reck, B. Bunk et al., The biolm inhibitor
carolacton enters gram-negative cells: studies using a TolCdecient strain of Escherichia coli, mSphere, vol. 2, no. 5,
B. Kunze, M. Reck, A. Dtsch et al., Damage of Streptococcus
mutans biolms by carolacton, a secondary metabolite from
the myxobacterium Sorangium cellulosum, BMC Microbiology, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 199, 2010.
S. Sainas, F. Dosio, D. Boschi, and M. L. Lolli, Targeting
human onchocerciasis: recent advances beyond ivermectin,
in Annual Reports in Medicinal Chemistry, M. Botta, Ed.,
vol. 51, pp. 18, Academic Press, Cambridge, MA, USA,
K. M. Wagsta, H. Sivakumaran, S. M. Heaton, D. Harrich,
and D. A. Jans, Ivermectin is a specic inhibitor of importin
/-mediated nuclear import able to inhibit replication of
no. 3, pp. 851856, 2012.
L. Caly, J. D. Druce, M. G. Catton, D. A. Jans, and K. M.
Wagsta, The FDA-approved drug ivermectin inhibits the
replication of SARS-CoV-2 in vitro, Antiviral Research,
R. Yang, J. Xu, L. Xu et al., Cancer cell membrane-coated
for synergistic photodynamic/chemotherapy, ACS Nano,
vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 16301641, 2018.
C. Yao, W. Wang, P. Wang, M. Zhao, X. Li, and F. Zhang,
Near-infrared upconversion mesoporous cerium oxide hollow biophotocatalyst for concurrent pH-/H2O2-responsive
O2-evolving synergetic cancer therapy, Advanced Materials,
G. Gao, Y.-W. Jiang, H.-R. Jia, and F.-G. Wu, Near-infrared
light-controllable on-demand antibiotics release using thermosensitive hydrogel-based drug reservoir for combating bacterial infection, Biomaterials, vol. 188, pp. 8395, 2019.
no. 6, pp. 14201431.e17, 2019.
M. Rai, S. D. Deshmukh, A. P. Ingle, I. R. Gupta,
in Microbiology, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 4656, 2014.
N. G. Portney and M. Ozkan, Nano-oncology: drug delivery, imaging, and sensing, Analytical and Bioanalytical
Chemistry, vol. 384, no. 3, pp. 620630, 2006.
virus, Applied and Environmental Microbiology, vol. 78,
no. 4, pp. 951955, 2012.
S. Galdiero, A. Falanga, M. Vitiello, M. Cantisani,
S. Herold and L.-E. Sander, Toward a universal u vaccine,
Science, vol. 367, no. 6480, pp. 852-853, 2020.
K. Shen, Y. Yang, T. Wang et al., Diagnosis, treatment,
and prevention of 2019 novel coronavirus infection in
Z.-M. Chen, J. F. Fu, Q. Shu et al., Diagnosis and treatment
recommendations for pediatric respiratory infection caused
A. Casadevall and L. Pirofski, The convalescent sera option
vol. 130, no. 4, pp. 15451548, 2020.
L. Chen, J. Xiong, L. Bao, and Y. Shi, Convalescent plasma as
a potential therapy for COVID-19, The Lancet Infectious
Diseases, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 398400, 2020.
A. Maxmen, More than 80 clinical trials launch to test
coronavirus treatments, Nature, vol. 578, no. 7795,
X. Tian, C. Li, A. Huang et al., Potent binding of 2019 novel
coronavirus spike protein by a SARS coronavirus-specic
human monoclonal antibody, Emerging Microbes & Infections, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 382385, 2020.
E. Villamor, R. Mbise, D. Spiegelman et al., Vitamin A
supplements ameliorate the adverse eect of HIV-1,
P. P. Glasziou and D. E. Mackerras, Vitamin A supplementation in infectious diseases: a meta-analysis, BMJ, vol. 306,
no. 6874, pp. 366370, 1993.
Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 1049-1050,
A. R. Martineau, D. A. Jollie, R. L. Hooper et al., Vitamin D
supplementation to prevent acute respiratory tract infections:
A. J. W. te Velthuis, S. H. E. van den Worm, A. C. Sims, R. S.
Baric, E. J. Snijder, and M. J. van Hemert, Zn2+ inhibits coronavirus and arterivirus rna polymerase activity in vitro and
zinc ionophores block the replication of these viruses in cell
Z. S. Lassi, A. Moin, Z. A. Bhutta, and Cochrane Acute Respiratory Infections Group, Zinc supplementation for the prevention of pneumonia in children aged 2 months to 59
C. Alberda, L. Gramlich, N. Jones et al., The relationship
between nutritional intake and clinical outcomes in critically
ill patients: results of an international multicenter observational study, Intensive Care Medicine, vol. 35, no. 10,
M. Kalaiselvan, M. K. Renuka, and A. S. Arunkumar, Use of
nutrition risk in critically ill (NUTRIC) score to assess nutritional risk in mechanically ventilated patients: a prospective
X. Yang, Y. Yu, J. Xu et al., Clinical course and outcomes of
critically ill patients with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia in
Wuhan, China: a single-centered, retrospective, observational
study, The Lancet Respiratory Medicine, vol. 8, no. 5,
[225] Z. Wu and J. M. McGoogan, Characteristics of and important lessons from the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
outbreak in China, JAMA, vol. 323, no. 13, pp. 12391242,
[226] H.-Y. Kim, H. S. Shin, H. Park et al., In vitro inhibition of
coronavirus replications by the traditionally used medicinal
herbal extracts, Cimicifuga rhizoma, Meliae cortex, Coptidis
Virology, vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 122128, 2008.
[227] J.-R. Weng, C. S. Lin, H. C. Lai et al., Antiviral activity of
Sambucus FormosanaNakai ethanol extract and related phenolic acid constituents against human coronavirus NL63,
[228] L.-x. Nie, Y.-l. Wu, Z. Dai, and S.-c. Ma, Antiviral activity of
[229] J. Ren, A.-H. Zhang, and X.-J. Wang, Traditional Chinese
medicine for COVID-19 treatment, Pharmacological
[230] Y. Han, M. R. Zhao, B. Shi, Z. H. Song, S. P. Zhou, and Y. He,
Application of integrative medicine protocols on treatment
of coronavirus disease 2019, Chinese Traditional and Herbal
Drugs, vol. 51, pp. 878882, 2020.
[232] Y. Song, C. Yao, Y. Yao et al., XueBiJing injection versus
placebo for critically ill patients with severe communityacquired pneumonia: a randomized controlled trial, Critical
Care Medicine, vol. 47, no. 9, pp. e735e743, 2019.
[233] P. Van Pham and N. K. Phan, Welcome to progress in stem
cell, Progress in Stem Cell, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1-2, 2014.
[234] J. Chen, C. Hu, L. Chen et al., Clinical study of mesenchymal
stem cell treatment for acute respiratory distress syndrome
induced by epidemic inuenza A (H7N9) infection: a hint
for COVID-19 treatment, Engineering, 2020.
[235] B. Liang, J. Chen, T. Li et al., Clinical remission of a critically
ill COVID-19 patient treated by human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells, ChinaXiv, 2020.
[236] Z. Leng, R. Zhu, W. Hou et al., Transplantation of ACE2mesenchymal stem cells improves the outcome of patients
with COVID-19 pneumonia, Aging and Disease, vol. 11,
no. 2, pp. 216228, 2020.
of investigational vaccine for COVID-19 begins, 2020,
[239] DRAFT landscape of COVID-19 candidate vaccines-20
[240] M. H. Wol, S. A. Sattar, O. Adegbunrin, and J. Tetro, Environmental survival and microbicide inactivation of coronaviruses, in Coronaviruses with Special Emphasis on First
Insights Concerning SARS, A. Schmidt, O. Weber, and M. H.
Wol, Eds., pp. 201212, Birkhuser Advances in Infectious
Diseases BAID, Birkhuser Basel, 2005.
N. van Doremalen, T. Bushmaker, D. H. Morris et al., Aerosol and surface stability of SARS-CoV-2 as compared with
no. 16, pp. 15641567, 2020.
Key export products for COVID-19 diagnosis & treatment,
Researchers develop new test kit to detect coronavirus in
J. P. Broughton, W. Deng, C. L. Fasching, J. Singh, C. Y. Chiu,
and J. S. Chen, A protocol for rapid detection of the 2019 novel
Channelnewsasia, New COVID-19 test kits used to screen swab
S. F. Ahmed, A. A. Quadeer, and M. R. McKay, Preliminary
identication of potential vaccine targets for the COVID-19
coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) based on SARS-CoV immunological studies, Viruses, vol. 12, no. 3, p. 254, 2020.
Q. Li, J. Yin, Q. S. Ran et al., Ecacy and mechanism of
Lianhua Qingwen Capsules(LHQW) on chemotaxis of macrophages in acute lung injury (ALI) animal model, China
X. Chen, Y. Feng, X. Shen et al., Anti-sepsis protection of
Xuebijing injection is mediated by dierential regulation of
pro- and anti-inammatory Th17 and T regulatory cells in
[254] Y. Zhang, B. Chi-Yan Cheng, R. Xie, B. Xu, X. Y. Gao, and
G. Luo, Re-Du-Ninginhalation solution exerts suppressive
eect on the secretion of inammatory mediatorsviainhibiting IKK//IB/NF-B, MAPKs/AP-1, and TBK1/IRF3
signaling pathways in lipopolysaccharide stimulated RAW
264.7 macrophages, RSC Advances, vol. 9, no. 16, pp. 8912
[255] S. Peng, N. Hang, W. Liu et al., Andrographolide sulfonate
ameliorates lipopolysaccharide-induced acute lung injury in
mice by down-regulating MAPK and NF-B pathways, Acta
Pharmaceutica Sinica B, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 205211, 2016.
[256] W. Liu, H. L. Jiang, L. L. Cai, M. Yan, S. J. Dong, and B. Mao,
Tanreqing injection attenuates lipopolysaccharide-induced
airway inammation through MAPK/NF-B signaling
pathways in rats model, Evidence-Based Complementary
[257] Y. Lyu, L. S. Fu, J. Zhou, J. Cai, X. Y. Chen, and H. L. Zhong,
Action mechanism of Shenfu injection by computational
Traditional Medical Formulae, vol. 21, pp. 217221, 2015.
