Evaluating Potential Deceased Donor Renal
Transplant Recipients for Asymptomatic COVID-19
Quan Yao Ho, MRCP, MMed,1,2 Shimin Jasmine Chung, MRCP,2,3 Shoen Choon Seng Low, FRCR, MMed,4
Robert Chun Chen, MD,4 Swee Ping Teh, MRCP,1 Fu Zi Yvonne Chan, MRCP, MMed,3 Ban Hock Tan, FRCP,2,3
and Terence Yi Shern Kee, FRCP, FACP1,2
e present a case of asymptomatic coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) diagnosed in a hemodialysis
patient during deceased donor renal transplantation (DDRT)
evaluation and discuss the challenges of excluding COVID-19
before transplantation.
A 50-year-old woman with end-stage renal disease
secondary to IgA nephropathy on hemodialysis was
called up as first on the waitlist. She was screened for
with the addition of a chest computed tomography (CT)
Our patient and her brother, her only household contact, were asymptomatic, had no known contact with
COVID-19 cases or suspects, and had not travelled
overseas for 3 months. She continued her work as a
hawker but wore a cloth mask for all activities outside her home, except during exercise. On admission,
she was afebrile, with a respiratory rate of 18 breaths/
min and her pulse oximetry reading was 96% on room
air. Physical examination revealed bilateral basal lung
crepitations without signs of volume overload. She had
lymphopenia though her white cell count was normal.
Her chest radiograph revealed bilateral mild, ill-defined
patchy opacities, while CT of the chest showed bilateral nodular air space consolidation, predominantly
Department of Renal Medicine, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore.
SingHealth Duke-NUS Transplant Centre, Singapore.
Department of Infectious Diseases, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore.
Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore.
Correspondence: Quan Yao Ho, MRCP, MMed, Department of Renal Medicine,
(CCBY-NC-ND), where it is permissible to download and share the work provided
Transplantation DIRECT
Nasopharyngeal swab for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 later returned positive on the same
Transplantation was held off, and the patient was
immediately transferred to an isolation ward. She developed a temperature of 37.6C the following morning and
mild symptoms (eg, cough, myalgia, vomiting, and diarrhea) only from day 3 of admission (D3). She did not
require supplemental oxygen, and her symptoms resolved
on D10. Repeat respiratory swabs first returned negative
on D20.
The optimal strategy to exclude COVID-19 before
DDRT is unclear. With significant unlinked community
transmission and an incubation period of approximately
2 weeks, COVID-19 cannot be confidently excluded with
clinical and epidemiological history. Dialysis patients may
have minimal symptoms or present atypically (eg, with
predominantly gastrointestinal symptoms).2 Home isolation is impossible if they require regular hemodialysis in
the community. Laboratory findings such as lymphopenia
are nonspecific.
Real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
on respiratory specimens is used to confirm COVID-19,
but its sensitivity may be affected by the patients functional status, type of respiratory specimen, and collection
technique3 and has been reported to be initially negative, especially in mild or early illness.4 The sensitivity of
respiratory swabs within a short time frame to exclude
COVID-19 may be limited.
Chest radiography may be a useful adjunct in the
screening of COVID-19 but is not sensitive in mild
or early disease. In a recent meta-analysis, CT was
suggested to be more sensitive than real-time reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction3 but can be
also negative in mild or early disease.5 CT findings
are nonspecific (eg, pulmonary congestion may mimic
viral pneumonia) which can add further complexity to
patient assessment.
Given the potentially devastating consequences
of peritransplant COVID-19, we find it necessary to
exclude COVID-19 as best as possible before DDRT,
but this will likely remain challenging. A combination
of clinical, molecular, and radiological investigations
may help detect early COVID-19 but may not eliminate
Transplantation DIRECT
the risk of COVID-19 especially given the time sensitivity of DDRT. The risks and benefits of proceeding with transplantation during this pandemic needs
to be carefully considered and also discussed with the
1. Chung SJ, Tan EK, Kee T, et al. Practical considerations for solid organ
transplantation during the COVID-19 global outbreak: the experience
from Singapore. Transplant Direct. 2020;6:e554.
2. Wang R, Liao C, He H, et al. COVID-19 in hemodialysis patients: a
3. Kim H, Hong H, Yoon SH. Diagnostic performance of CT and reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction for coronavirus disease
4. Young BE, Ong SWX, Kalimuddin S, et al. Epidemiologic features and
clinical course of patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 in Singapore.
5. Bernheim A, Mei X, Huang M, et al. Chest CT findings in coronavirus disease-19 (COVID-19): relationship to duration of infection.
