ORIGINAL  RESEARCH LETTER of first case in Foshan, China The out‐
break of the 2019 new coronavirus pneumonia has caught  worldwide
attention.  Since  December  2019, several pneumonia cases of un‐
known origin have been found in hospitals in Wuhan, Hubei conduct
pathogen  tests on alveolar lavage fluid, throat swabs, blood and
other samples by methods of virus isolation, nucleic acid testing
and  genome  sequencing, among others. On 7 January 2020, a novel
coronavirus, previously undetected in humans,  was  isolated  and
its  full  genome  sequence was decoded [1].  On 12 January 2020,
the World Health Organization (WHO)  officially  named  this  new
coronavirus  causing  the outbreak of pneumonia in Wuhan the 2019
new coronavirus (SARS‐CoV‐2).  Since the end  of  December  2019,
the  number  of  cases  with  SARS‐CoV‐2  infection has increased
rapidly.  As of 24:00 h on 13 February, there were  63  946  con‐
firmed cases of SARS‐CoV‐2 acute respiratory disease in China and
162 confirmed cases in 26 other  countries.  WHO  has  classified
this  outbreak as a public health emergency of international con‐
cern. The outbreak of SARS‐CoV‐2 seriously endangers human health
and  life,  affects the social order, and causes substantial eco‐
nomic losses.  Currently, there are no effective drugs for  SARS‐
CoV‐2, and its primary treatment is only symptomatic and support‐
ive. Critically ill patients are in danger at  any  time.  Timely
measures  to  prevent  the occurrence of severe pneumonia and the
development of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) are the
key  to the treatment of SARS‐CoV‐2. Although the pathogenesis of
SARS‐CoV‐2 is unclear, its molecular mechanism of infecting human
respiratory  epithelial  cells  through  the Spike protein is the
same as that of SARS‐CoV‐1 and the symptoms caused by its  infec‐
tion  are  similar  to those of severe acute respiratory syndrome
(SARS). At the end of 2002, our  hospital  had  hospitalised  and
cured  the  worlds  first  SARS  patient, and the total number of
these cases admitted and confirmed would surpass 110.  No  hospi‐
talised  patients  died  and  all were eventually discharged. Our
hospital has gained meaningful experience in the treatment of se‐
vere pneumonia caused by coronavirus infection. To provide a ref‐
erence for the treatment of SARS‐CoV‐2, we  report  the  detailed
history, onset, disease evolution, diagnosis and treatment of the
first case of SARS‐CoV‐2 in Foshan, China.  This  patient  was  a
40‐year‐old  man  with no underlying disease other than hyperten‐
sion. The patient had no recent travel history to Hubei  Province
or  Wuhan  but  his  wife had recently travelled to Wuhan and re‐
turned to Foshan City (Guangdong Province)  on  6  January  2020.
During  her trip, she had a low fever and cough but symptoms were
relieved within 1 week without any treatments. The  patient  went
to  Guangzhou  South  railway  station, a crowded high‐speed rail
hub, to pick up his wife. On 10 January 2020, the  patient  began
to get sick, with fever as the initial symptom. There was no dis‐
cernible pattern of fever, and the highest temperature was 39.0C,
accompanied  by  chills  and intermittent dry cough. However, the
patient did not take the disease seriously until  1  week  later,
when  his  symptoms  gradually worsened with shortness of breath,
and then he went to the local community hospital  for  treatment.
Test  results  showed  high  procalcitonin and hypoxia. The local
physicians treated him for bacterial pneumonia but  the  symptoms
did  not  improve, as he still had a fever, worsened shortness of
breath and diarrhoea.  The first case of #COVID19 in Foshan  pro‐
vides  a reference for the treatment of severe ERJ Open Res 2020;
6: 00090‐2020 ORIGINAL RESEARCH LETTER | L. ZHOU ET AL.   Consid‐
ering that he recently had been in close contact with people from
the epidemic area, the local physicians  thought  he  might  have
SARS‐CoV‐2.  Because  his  shortness of breath gradually worsened
and given the risk of progression to ARDS, he was transferred  to
our  hospital for further treatment.  When the patient was admit‐
ted to our hospital on 20 January 2020, he was quarantined  as  a
suspected  patient, and strict protective measures were taken for
his attending doctors and nurses. On that day,  he  had  a  chest
computed  tomography  (CT) scan and the result indicated multiple
inflammatory exudation in patient was sent to Foshan  Centre  for
Disease  Control for the SARS‐CoV‐2 assay. 12 h later, the result
Octapharma 500 mL once daily ivgtt.  Thymosin 1.6 mg  once  daily
ih.   Moxioxacin  400  mg  once  daily ivgtt.  Piperacillin sodi‐
um/tazobactam sodium 4 g/0.5 g every 8 h ivgtt.  Lopinavir/Liton‐
avir  200  mg/50  mg twice daily by mouth Oseltamivir 75 mg twice
daily by mouth Hapgen 30 g twice daily inh.  HHFNC 50  Lmin1  45%
31C  NC 2 Lmin1 NC 4 Lmin1 NC 4 Lmin1 NC 2 Lmin1 SARS‐CoV‐2 posi‐
tive in throat swab SARS‐CoV‐2 positive in respiratory secretions
SARS‐CoV‐2 negative in throat swab Time days Oxygen partial pres‐
sure mmHg Time days Time days Time days Time days Time days Heart
rate  beats  per min IL‐6 pgmL1 Time days Time days Body tempera‐
ture C Respiratory rate breaths per min  SARS‐CoV‐2  negative  in
faeces and urine Oxygenation index mmHg%1 White blood count 109L1
PCT ngmL1 Lactic acid mmolL1 Time days Time days  along.  c)  Pa‐
tient  status  tracking  during  treatment, including lactic acid
level, procalcitonin (PCT) level,  lymphocyte  percentage  value,
white blood cell count, interleukin (IL)‐6 level, oxygenation in‐
dex level, oxygen partial pressure, heart rate, respiratory  rate
and  body temperature. Green lines represent the limits of normal
values and light shading represents the normal range. HHNFC:  hu‐
midified  high‐flow  nasal cannula; NC: nasal cannula; ivgtt: in‐
travenous glucose drip; ih: hypodermic injection; inh inhalation.
ORIGINAL  RESEARCH  LETTER | L. ZHOU ET AL.  was positive for the
SARS‐CoV‐2 sequence detected by RT‐PCR assay. The patient was di‐
agnosed  as  suffering  from  SARS‐CoV‐2. The patient had a rapid
respiratory rate (>30 breaths per min), respiratory hospital days
15, we treated the patient with normal nasal cannula oxygen ther‐
apy (4 Lmin1). On days 5 and 6, nasal cannula oxygen therapy  was
changed  to  2 Lmin1. However, on day 7, the patients oxygenation
index decreased to 278 mmHg%1, SOFA (Sepsis‐Related Organ Failure
Assessment)  score  2  and CURB‐65 score 0. The patient developed
acute respiratory failure but did not progress to ARDS. We  began
to treat him with humidified high‐flow nasal cannula (HHFNC) oxy‐
gen therapy (31C, 50 Lmin1, 45% oxygen concentration) for  48  h.
The  patients symptoms were beginning to relieve by day 9, and we
continued ordinary nasal cannula oxygen therapy  at  4  Lmin1  on
days  914  and 2 Lmin1 on days 1417. The antivirus therapy was as
follow: oseltamivir was administered orally at 75 mg twice  daily
from  day  1 to day 6; lopinavir/litonavir orally at 200 mg/50 mg
twice daily from day 7 to day 13; and hapgen atomised 30 g  every
12  h  from day 1 to day 14. To enhance immunity, the patient was
hypodermically injected with thymosin 1.6 mg once daily from  day
3 to day 14. To prevent bacterial infection, the patient was giv‐
en moxifloxacin intravenous drip 400 mg once daily from day 1  to
10 and piperacillin sodium/ tazobactam sodium (8/1) 4.5 g every 8
h ivgtt from day 11 to day 18. From day 7 to day 10, the  patient
was  given  20% human serum albumin (Octapharma) intravenous drip
50 mL once daily. Full drugs, function, inflammation  indicators,
blood  routine indicators and other parameters were checked regu‐
larly negative and the two subsequent tests on day 17  were  also
negative  for  SARS‐CoV‐2  from patients faeces and urine. At the
same time, his fever and shortness of breath  were  significantly
relieved,  and  his  oxygenation  improved. Oxygen therapy was no
longer required, and the patient was  declared  clinically  cured
and  discharged from hospital in day 18 (6 February 2020). Gluco‐
corticoids were not used throughout the treatment.  The infection
source  of the patient deserves our attention. Before the illness
onset, the patient had no travel history  to  the  epidemic  area
(Wuhan) with community transmission of SARS‐CoV‐2 and had no con‐
tact with confirmed cases of SARS‐CoV‐2  infection.  His  illness
began  after he went to a high‐speed train station to pick up his
wife, who had returned from the epidemic area of Wuhan. His  wife
developed a low fever cough on 4 January and her body temperature
decreased to normal values after returning to Foshan. She was al‐
so  admitted  to the hospital for isolation on 2 January; the re‐
sult of chest examination was  normal  and  the  results  of  two
throat  swabs (which were obtained at an interval of 24 h) tested
for SARS‐CoV‐2 nucleic acid by RT‐PCR assays were both  negative.
Although  the  patients  wife  cannot  be ruled out as the direct
source of infection, the infection source may have also come from
other  SARS‐CoV‐2 carriers from the epidemic area of Wuhan in the
crowded high‐speed railway station. In conclusion,  this  patient
is  a  typical case of human‐to‐human transmission of SARS‐CoV‐2.
Other relatives who had close contact with the patient  were  not
infected during the isolation period. The patient is the earliest
confirmed case of human‐to‐human transmission of  SARS‐CoV‐2  in‐
fection  outside the epidemic area in China. When the patient was
diagnosed, the provinces and cities in China also rapidly started
implementing  major  public  health  measures  to prevent further
spread of SARS‐CoV‐2.  The patient had multiple organ damage  and
the  main  target organ was the lung. After 14 days of the course
of the disease, there were still changes in the pulmonary imaging
progress when the respiratory nucleic acid had begun to turn neg‐
ative, and the other organs had also recovered from  the  damage.
The pulmonary imaging progress might be related to the incomplete
clearance of the virus. The nucleic acid  of  respiratory  secre‐
tions,  in  this case, turned negative around the 16th day of the
course of the disease, which was accompanied by  the  improvement
of  pulmonary  imaging. The clinical symptoms of the disease were
not consistent with the imaging changes but more consistent  with
the respiratory nucleic acid conversion to negative. According to
the disease development of this patient, the  natural  course  of
the  severe  case  was as long as 18 days and the disease did not
enter the progressive stage until 1 week after the onset  of  the
disease.   respiratory  secretions  still tested positive for the
nucleic acid RT‐PCR test 2 days after the use  of  lopinavir  the
natural  progression  taking  into account the point at which the
respiratory nucleic acid tests began to turn negative. Therefore,
there is no evidence that patients respond well to treatment, and
there is no On day 7 after the onset of the disease, the  patient
started  to  have  acute  respiratory failure, which lasted for 1
week. However, after HHFNC oxygen therapy, intermittent  noninva‐
sive ventilation and other supportive treatment, the condition of
the patient gradually stabilised, and  thus  invasive  mechanical
ventilation  therapy  was  avoided. Studies have shown that HHFNC
oxygen therapy can reduce the ORIGINAL RESEARCH LETTER | L.  ZHOU
ET  AL.  intubation rate of patients with acute respiratory fail‐
ure, which can not only improve the symptoms of hypoxia and avoid
carbon dioxide retention but also provide some positive end‐expi‐
ratory pressure to avoid atelectasis [2]. When the patients  have
obvious shortness of breath that cannot be alleviated by ordinary
oxygen therapy, active and full respiratory support should be ap‐
plied.  HHFNC oxygen may be the most valuable for lung protection
and recovery. Meanwhile, active atomisation treatment may also be
beneficial in improving the condition, which has been reported in
Germany for SARS‐CoV‐2 [3]. In this case of pneumonia, the  char‐
acteristics  of  lung  lesions were different from ARDS caused by
traditional community‐acquired pneumonia and the tissue functions
of  noninvolved  lung  were  basically normal, so there were mild
symptoms and serious lung imaging changes [4].  Notably,  regard‐
ing the blood analysis, SARS‐CoV‐2 is mainly characterised by low
numbers of both white blood cells and lymphocytes. Thymosin a1‐a,
as a widely used immunomodulatory agent, was given to the patient
to enhance his immunity during the treatment  [5].  After  injec‐
tion,  the number of lymphocytes and the lymphocyte percentage of
the patient returned to normal, and no drug‐related fever or  al‐
lergic  reactions  were detected. After this treatment, the serum
interleukin (IL)‐6 of the patient  decreased  gradually  and  his
clinical  symptoms  were  relieved, which was consistent with the
nature of ARDS, an acute inflammatory clinical  syndrome  per  se
[6].  The  patients  leukocyte count was low and IL‐6 was high at
the early stage, but his overall  serum  inflammatory  level  was
less severe than those of patients with bacterial sepsis or ARDS.
The pathogenesis of SARS‐CoV‐2 is unknown but its molecular mech‐
anism  for  infecting  human respiratory epithelial cells through
Spike protein is the same as that of SARS‐CoV‐1 and the infection
symptoms  are  similar to those of SARS. The overall mortality of
SARS was 11%, whereas the mortality of SARS‐CoV‐2 is 2%. However,
the total number of SARS‐CoV‐2 cases has exceeded that of the en‐
tire SARS crisis. In comparison with SARS‐CoV‐1, the  infectivity
of  SARS‐CoV‐2  has increased but the virulence has weakened. The
reason why SARS‐CoV‐2 caused the severe epidemic is directly  re‐
lated  to the large number of patients with mild illness. Because
it is a new coronavirus, people unconsciously  compared  it  with
SARS‐CoV‐1 and MERS‐CoV, and thus felt deceived and panicked. The
recovery of this patient  with  severe  pneumonia  is  relatively
close  to  a natural outcome and the antiviral drugs may be inef‐
fective. The characteristics of pulmonary lesions caused by SARS‐
CoV‐2 infection are different from ARDS caused by traditional ac‐
quired pneumonia. The normal  lung  tissues  could  provide  fine
functional  compensation,  resulting in mild symptoms and serious
pulmonary imaging changes, which should  be  taken  seriously  in
following a coping strategy.  SARS‐CoV‐2 can be transmitted among
human beings. Compared with SARS‐CoV‐1, its infectivity is higher
but  its virulence is weaker; hence, its response to conventional
treatment may be relatively better.  There may be a latent trans‐
mission  of  SARS‐CoV‐1  and people without any symptoms can also
transmit the virus. Timely and sufficient noninvasive respiratory
support and atomisation are effective to mitigate the respiratory
distress. Immunomodulatory drugs can be applied appropriately  in
the  absence  of  excessive  Lixin  Zhou1, Weibiao Wen1, Honglian
Bai2, Fengyun Wang1, Haiming Yan2,  Chang  Li1,  Minfeng  Liang2,
Jiarong  Zhong1, Jinsong Shao1, Tieou Yu1, Xinhua Qiang1, Xiaofan
Mao3, Kairong Lin3, Zhanwen Guan3, Yinong Ye2 and Wei  Luo3  Con‐
flict  of  interest:  L. Zhou has nothing to disclose. W. Wen has
nothing to disclose. H. Bai has nothing to disclose.  F. Wang has
nothing  to  disclose.  H. Yan has nothing to disclose. C. Li has
nothing to disclose. M. Liang has nothing to disclose.  J.  Zhong
has  nothing  to disclose. J. Shao has nothing to disclose. T. Yu
has nothing to disclose. X. Qiang has nothing to disclose. X. Mao
has  nothing  to disclose. Z. Guan has nothing to disclose. Y. Ye
has nothing to disclose.  W. Luo has nothing to disclose.  Zhu N,
Zhang  D,  Wang  W, et al. A novel coronavirus from patients with
pneumonia in China, 2019. N Engl J Med Xu Z, Li Y, Zhou J, et al.
High‐flow  nasal cannula in adults with acute respiratory failure
and after extubation: a ORIGINAL RESEARCH LETTER | L. ZHOU ET AL.
Rothe  C,  Schunk M, Sothmann P, et al. Transmission of 2019‐nCoV
infection from an asymptomatic contact in Germany. N Engl  J  Med
2020; 382: 970971.  Chung M, Bernheim A, Mei X, et al. CT imaging
features of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019‐nCoV).  Radiology  2020;
Wang  FY, Fang B, Qiang XH, et al. The efficacy and immunomodula‐
tory effects of ulinastatin and thymosin 1 for Force ADT, Ranieri
VM, Rubenfeld GD, et al. Acute respiratory distress syndrome: the
Berlin Definition. JAMA












