Recommendations  in covid‐19 times: a view for home care Recomen‐
daes em tempos de COVID‐19: um olhar para  o  cuidado  domiciliar
Recomendaciones  en  tiempos de COVID‐19: una mirada a la atencin
domiciliaria Luana ToninI Maria Ribeiro LacerdaI Ana  Paula  Her‐
mannII  Universidade  Federal  do Paran. Curitiba, Paran, Brazil.
Universidade Federal do Paran, Complexo Hospital de Clnicas.  Cu‐
ritiba, Paran, Brazil.  Tonin L, Lacerda MR, Caceres NTG, Hermann
AP.  Recommendations in covid‐19 times: a  view  for  home  care.
Luana  Tonin  EDITOR  IN CHIEF: Dulce Aparecida Barbosa ASSOCIATE
EDITOR: Antonio Jos de Almeida Filho Objective: To suggest recom‐
mendations  for  the  practice  of Home Nursing in the context of
COVID‐19. Method: Reflective study, originated from readings  as‐
sociated with the theme, available in current guidelines from the
Pan American Health Organization, World Health  Organization  and
the  Ministry  of Health. Results: Recommendations were developed
from current scientific evidence for  prevention  of  infections,
control  of  epidemics  and  pandemics in the Brazilian home sce‐
nario. Final considerations: the reflections achieved  contribute
to  guiding  actions for better assistance to the patient, family
caregivers and the community in the perspective of safe home care
with COVID‐19, and it is characterized as an introductory discus‐
sion on the theme, encouraging new studies to be carried out from
the  unfolding of the current scenario.  Descriptors: SARS Virus;
Homebound Persons; Home Health Nursing; Home Care  Services;  De‐
livery of Health Care.  Objetivo: Propor recomendaes para a prti‐
ca de enfermagem domiciliar no contexto da COVID‐19. Mtodo: Estu‐
do  reflexivo, produzido com base em leituras correlacionadas com
a rea temtica, disponveis em diretrizes atuais da Organizao  Pan‐
Americana da Sade, Organizao Mundial da Sade e Ministrio da Sade.
Resultados: Foram construdas recomendaes segundo evidncias cient‐
ficas  atuais  para  preveno  de infeces, controle de epidemias e
pandemias no contexto domiciliar brasileiro. Consideraes  finais:
As  reflexes  realizadas contribuem para nortear aes com vistas a
uma melhor assistncia ao paciente, familiares cuidadores e  comu‐
nidade na perspectiva de um cuidado domiciliar seguro em relao
 COVID‐19;  se  caracterizam  como  uma  discusso inicial sobre o
tema, estimulando que novos estudos sejam realizados com base  na
evoluo  do  cenrio  atual.   Descritores: Vrus da SARS; Pacientes
Domiciliares; Enfermagem Domiciliar; Servios de Assistncia  Domi‐
ciliar;  Assistncia   Sade.   Objetivo:  Proponer recomendaciones
para la prctica de enfermera domiciliaria en el  contexto  de  la
COVID‐19.  Mtodo:  Estudio  reflexivo, producido a partir de lec‐
turas relacionadas con el rea temtica, disponibles en directrices
actuales  de la Organizacin Panamericana de la Salud, Organizacin
Mundial de la Salud y Ministerio de la Salud. Resultados: Han si‐
do  construidas recomendaciones a partir de evidencias cientficas
actuales para prevencin de infecciones, control  de  epidemias  y
pandemias en el contexto domiciliario brasileo. Conclusiones: Las
reflexiones realizadas contribuyen  para  orientar  acciones  con
vistas  a una mejor asistencia al paciente, familiares cuidadores
y comunidad en la perspectiva de una atencin domiciliaria  segura
en  relacin a la COVID‐19; se caracterizan como una discusin ini‐
cial sobre el tema, estimulando que nuevos estudios sean realiza‐
dos  a partir de la evolucin del escenario actual.  Descriptores:
Virus del SARS;  Pacientes  Domiciliares;  Enfermera  Domiciliar;
Servicios  de  Asistencia  Domiciliaria;  Asistencia  a la Salud.
Recommendations in covid‐19 times: a view for home care Tonin  L,
Lacerda  MR,  Caceres  NTG,  Hermann  AP.  At the end of December
2019, the first cases of the disease called COVID‐19,  caused  by
the  SARS‐CoV‐2 virus, were recorded in Wuhan province, China(1),
from that moment the numbers of  infected  people  increased  and
spread  to all continents, but only on March 11th, 2020, COVID‐19
was defined by the World Health Organization (WHO) as  a  pandem‐
ic(2).   Since  then,  health  institutions  around the world and
nursing services have been under continuous  pressure  against  a
potentially fatal respiratory disease, but it is still uncertain,
as so far there is no specific vaccine or treatment  against  the
virus,  so  quarantine and social isolation have been the measure
taken by several countries in  an  attempt  to  reduce  transmis‐
sion(2).   The role of nurses and other professionals goes beyond
hospital environments, many of them work  in  the  homes  of  pa‐
tients,  and  in  this health scenario, home patients are usually
those syndromes, neurological, hypertensive, diabetic  disorders,
and  are  also susceptible to the SARS‐CoV‐2 virus(3).  Home care
stands out from the technical‐scientific knowledge learned during
the  training of nursing professionals, as entering someones home
and developing care actions requires much more than  knowing  and
acting.  Because  care  is  carried out in at the patient and his
familys environment,  and  the  health  professional  is  a  mere
guest(4).   The home is the place of care, it is in this environ‐
ment that relationships are built and strengthened, beliefs, val‐
ues,  habits  and  traditions are considered and discussed in the
planning of actions, as the home scenario influences and  affects
the  recovery and health of the patient(4).  The care provided by
nurses at home, even if considered relevant, is  still  incipient
given  the specificity of the current scenario.  It is considered
that studies addressing the theme of  COVID‐19  at  home  can  be
identified(3,5). However, currently, there are no specific norms,
policies, or scientific consensus on the description  and  recom‐
mendation  of  nursing  care at home for COVID‐19, thus showing a
knowledge gap.  In this perspective, this  theoretical‐reflective
essay was developed from readings associated with the theme, hav‐
ing as the main sources materials produced by  the  World  Health
Organization,  Pan  American Health Organization, and Ministry of
Health. These documents were developed from previous and  current
guidelines  with  the best scientific evidence for preventing in‐
fections, controlling epidemics and pandemics.  To suggest recom‐
mendations  for  the  practice  of Home Nursing in the context of
COVID‐19.  Home nursing practice and COVID‐19 The WHO  recommends
that  all  people  suspected of having COVID‐19 with severe acute
respiratory infection be screened at the first contact  with  the
health  system  and  that emergency treatment be started based on
the severity of the disease. It also recommended that  all  cases
confirmed  in  the laboratory be isolated and treated in a health
facility(3,5).  The WHO, later, updated the treatment  guidelines
for patients with Acute Respiratory Infection associated with the
SARS‐CoV‐2 virus including guidelines for vulnerable  populations
(for example, the elderly, pregnant women and children). In occa‐
sions where isolation in a health facility from all cases is  not
possible,  WHO  emphasizes prioritizing those most likely to have
poor results: patients with severe  and  critical  illnesses  and
those with mild illness and risk of poor outcome (age > 60 years,
cases with comorbidities,  for  example,  chronic  cardiovascular
disease, chronic respiratory disease, diabetes, cancer)(5‐6).  If
all mild cases cannot be isolated in health  institutions,  those
with  mild  illness  and  without risk factors may be isolated in
nontraditional units, such as reused hotels,  stadiums  or  gyms,
where  they  can  remain  until symptoms disappear and laboratory
tests for the COVID‐19 virus  are  negative.  Alternatively,  pa‐
tients  with mild illness and without risk factors can be managed
at home(3,5‐6).  For those with mild illness, hospitalization may
not  be  necessary  or may not be possible due to the overcrowded
health system, unless there is concern about the  fast  worsening
of  the condition(6).  Thus, if there are patients with mild ill‐
ness, the care at home can be considered, as long as they can  be
followed‐up  and treated by family members and health profession‐
als respectively(3).  Home care can also be considered when  hos‐
pital  care  is  not available or is unsafe (for example, size is
limited and resources are unable to meet the  demand  for  health
services).  In  any of these situations, patients with mild symp‐
toms(3) and without chronic conditions,  such  as:  pulmonary  or
heart  disease,  kidney  failure  or immunocompromised conditions
that subject the patient at increased risk of developing  compli‐
cations,  can  be treated at home. This decision requires careful
clinical judgment by the multi‐professional team and must involve
an  assessment of the safety of the patients home environment for
continuity of care(5).  Recommendation for home nursing  care  in
cases  of In cases where care should be provided at home, if pos‐
sible, the nurse should assess to check if the  home  environment
is  adequate  for the continuity of care; the health professional
should assess whether the patient and family can  adhere  to  the
recommended  precautions  as  part  of the isolation of home care
(for example, hand hygiene, respiratory hygiene,  cleanliness  of
the  environment,  movement limitations around or at home) and if
safety issues can be addressed (for example, accidental ingestion
and  fire  risks  associated  with the use of alcohol‐based fric‐
tion)(3,5).  If and whenever possible, a communication link  with
the nurse or the health team, or both, must be established during
the period of home care, that is,  until  the  patients  symptoms
have  completely  disappeared(3).  But  comprehensive information
about COVID‐19 and its  transmission  is  needed  to  define  the
length of isolation precautions at home. Patients and family mem‐
bers should be informed about personal hygiene, basic  prevention
and infection control measures so that they can care as safely as
possible for the person suspected of having COVID‐19  to  prevent
the infection from spreading to family contacts(3,5). The patient
and family members should receive ongoing support and  education,
and  monitoring  should  continue  during home Recommendations in
covid‐19 times: a view for home care Tonin L, Lacerda MR, Caceres
NTG,  Hermann  AP.  care. Nurses should guide patients and family
members to follow the recommendations explained in Charts 1 and 2
respectively.   The nurse, when preparing for home care, must se‐
lect the necessary materials, must carry out a risk assessment to
choose the appropriate personal protective equipment, and in this
case follow  the  recommendations  for  contact  precautions  and
droplets, and others as explained in Chart 3.  Chart 1‐ Recommen‐
dations for the patients Recommendations for family caregivers  ‐
Clean  and  sanitize  the  bathroom surfaces at least once a day.
First, use common soap or detergent and, after rinsing,  apply  a
common  disinfectant  containing  a 0.1% sodium hypochlorite (for
example equivalent to 1000 ppm)(3).  ‐ Utensils used by  the  pa‐
tient  must  be washed with water and common detergent after use,
and they can be reused (preferably by the patient) instead of be‐
ing discarded(3).  ‐ Wash beddings in the machine/tank with regu‐
lar washing powder, hot water, between 6090 C (140194 F) and  dry
them  thoroughly(3).   Recommendations  for  the patients* ‐ Stay
alone in a well‐ventilated room (that is, with open  windows  and
an  open door).  ‐ Avoid sharing spaces, if necessary, do this at
separate times from other residents of the house.  ‐ Do not  take
in  visitors  until your complete recovery and the signs or symp‐
toms of COVID‐19 disappear.  ‐ Wash hands frequently and also be‐
fore  eating,  after  using  the bathroom and whenever your hands
look dirty, using soap and water. If your hands are  not  visibly
dirty,  you  can rub them with 70% alcohol hand sanitizer.  ‐ Use
disposable paper towels to dry your hands after washing them with
soap and water. If they are not available, use clean cloth towels
and replace them frequently.  ‐ Use a surgical mask to hold  back
respiratory secretions(7) and you should change it whenever it is
wet, avoiding handling it.  ‐ Perform  severe  nose/nostrils  hy‐
giene  when  you  do not tolerate a surgical mask, that is, cover
your mouth and nose with a disposable  tissue  when  coughing  or
sneezing, then discarding them and washing your hands. If you use
cloth tissues, wash them with soap and water.  ‐ Clean and  sani‐
tize  surfaces that are frequently touched such as daily, when in
private use. First, use common soap or detergent and, after rins‐
ing, apply a common disinfectant containing 0.1% sodium hypochlo‐
rite (for example, equivalent to 1000 ppm)(3).  ‐ Keep a  covered
trash  can in the room with a plastic bag on top of it.  ‐ Do not
shake dirty clothing and prevent contact of contaminated  materi‐
als  with  the  skin and clothing you are using(3).  ‐ Protective
gloves and clothing (for example, plastic aprons) should be  used
when  cleaning surfaces or when handling clothes or sheets soiled
with body fluids(3).  ‐ Depending on the context,  rubber  (reus‐
able)  or disposable gloves can be used. After use, rubber gloves
should be cleaned with soap and  water  and  decontaminated  with
0.1%  sodium  hypochlorite  solution.   Disposable gloves must be
discarded after each use.  ‐ Wash hands before putting on and af‐
ter  removing gloves(3).  ‐ Avoid other types of exposure to con‐
taminated items in the patients close environment  (for  example,
do  not share toothbrushes, cigarettes, kitchen utensils, plates,
drinks, towels, clothes or bedding).  ‐ Gloves, masks  and  other
waste  generated during home care should be placed in a trash can
with a lid in the patients room before disposing of it as  infec‐
tious  waste(8).  ‐ Disposal of infectious waste must be provided
for and provided by the ‐ In places where there is no specialized
team,  identification of the contaminated material should be done
for the management of the selective collection team.  Chart  3  ‐
Recommendations for Nurses in home care Recommendations for Nurs‐
es in home care  ‐  Place  contaminated  clothing  in  a  laundry
bag(3).   ‐ Stay away from vulnerable people, the elderly and im‐
munosuppressed ‐ Pay attention to the symptoms and if you feel  a
worsening  request  a Note: * If the patient is unable to perform
the tasks mentioned above, assistance from a family caregiver  is
necessary.   ‐  Wear  a  surgical mask that covers your mouth and
nose when you are in the same room as the patient. Masks must not
be  touched or handled during use(3).  ‐ Replace the mask immedi‐
ately if it gets wet or dirty(3).  ‐ Remove the  mask  using  the
appropriate  technique ‐ that is, do not touch the front, but un‐
tie it.  ‐ Discard the mask immediately after use and wash hands.
Chart 2 ‐ Recommendations for family caregivers ‐ Wear gloves and
a disposable N95 mask when providing mouth  or  respiratory  care
and  handling  feces, urine and other waste.  Recommendations for
family caregivers ‐ Wash hands before and after  removing  gloves
and  masks.   ‐ Minimize sharing spaces. Family members must stay
in a different room or, if this is not possible, keep a  distance
of  at  least 1 meter from the sick person (for example, sleeping
in a separate bed)(6).   ‐  Keep  sharing  spaces  (for  example,
kitchen, bathroom) well ventilated (with windows open).  ‐ Reduce
the number of caregivers. Preferably, designate a person  who  is
in  good  health and who does not have chronic conditions or is ‐
Wash hands after any type of contact with patients or their close
environment(7),  and also before and after preparing food, before
eating, after using the bathroom and  whenever  your  hands  look
dirty,  using soap and water. If hands are not visibly dirty, 70%
alcohol‐based rubbing can be used.  ‐ Use disposable paper towels
to dry your hands after washing them with soap and water. If they
are not available, use clean cloth towels and replace  them  fre‐
quently.  To be continued ‐ Do not reuse masks or gloves.  ‐ Dis‐
posal of materials must be provided for and provided by the local
‐ In places where there is no specialized team, identification of
the contaminated material should be done for  the  management  of
the  selective  collection  team.   ‐ Perform, when indicated and
possible, the collection of diagnostic tests before releasing pa‐
tients  from  home isolation.  ‐ Establish communication with the
patient and family caregiver during the  observation  period.   ‐
Supervise  the health of others living in the same house by call‐
ing them regularly, but best and if possible, through daily  home
visits,  so  that  specific  diagnostic tests can be performed as
needed(9).  ‐ Keep an eye on compliance with  home  isolation  by
the  patient and others living in the same house, clarifying them
about the importance of this measure.  To be continued  Recommen‐
dations  in covid‐19 times: a view for home care Tonin L, Lacerda
MR, Caceres NTG, Hermann AP.  Recommendations for Nurses in  home
care  ‐ Give psychological support to the patient and family mem‐
bers and call on psychology professionals when necessary.  ‐  In‐
form  the  people  living in the same house in advance about when
and where to seek care, if they become ill, the most  appropriate
transport  to use, when and where to go for the designated health
facility and what precautions should be  followed(9).   ‐  Inform
the  patient  and family about possible signs of worsening of the
clinical condition and conduct to be followed.  ‐ Record all  in‐
formation  in the patients medical record, remembering that paper
records should be avoided and electronic devices used for  regis‐
tration purposes and should be disinfected after use.  FINAL CON‐
SIDERATIONS This  reflection  aimed  to  suggest  recommendations
based  on  recent evidence to guide nurses work in home care with
prevention and infection control in confirmed  or  suspected  pa‐
tients  with  COVID‐19.   It  is hoped that these guidelines will
promote practical strategies for home nursing  care  with  people
and  communities, aiming to expand the engagement and attitude in
the search for better  resolution  of  cases  and  situations  of
health  risk  in  their  real and potential scenarios.  It is be‐
lieved that the recommendations now made can  contribute  to  the
expansion  of  discussions on home nursing care in the context of
COVID‐19, also, to guide actions to improve care about  the  safe
care  of  the patient, family and territory.  Thus, this study is
characterized as an initial step in the discussion of  home  care
and  COVID‐19,  it  may  offer subsidies for new reflections that
promote and better elucidate the contributions  of  nursing  from
the  advance in the world and Brazilian scenario, contributing to
teaching and research.  As a limitation, these guidelines involve
the  need  to adapt the political, social and professional struc‐
tures, so that the professional can exercise, incorporate and im‐
plement such Organizao Pan‐Americana da Sade (BR). Folha informa‐
tiva  COVID‐19 (doena causada pelo novo  coronavrus)  [Internet].
Braslia  (DF): OPAS; World Health Organization. Home care for pa‐
tients with COVID‐19 presenting with mild symptoms and management
of  their  contacts: Interim World Health Organization. Home care
for patients with Middle East  respiratory  syndrome  coronavirus
(MERS‐CoV) infection presenting with mild symptoms and management
of contacts: interim guidance [Internet].  Geneva:  World  Health
Organization; 2018 [cited 2020 Jan World Health Organization. In‐
fection prevention and control of  epidemic‐  and  pandemic‐prone
acute  respiratory  diseases in health World Health Organization.
Clinical management of severe acute respiratory infection  (SARI)
when  COVID‐19 disease is suspected: Interim World Health Organi‐
zation. WHO guidelines on hand  hygiene  in  health  care:  first
global  patient  safety challenge [Internet]. Geneva: World World
Health Organization. Global surveillance for human infection with
novel coronavirus (2019‐nCoV): interim guidance, 31 January 2020




















