Childrens  (in)visibility  in social vulnerability and the impact
of the novel coronavirus (COVID‐19) A (in)visibilidade da  criana
em   vulnerabilidade  social  e  o  impacto  do  novo  coronavrus
(COVID19) La (in)visibilidad del nio en la vulnerabilidad  social
y  el  impacto  del  nuevo coronavirus (COVID19) Marialda Moreira
ChristoffelI  Ana  Leticia  Monteiro  GomesII  Tania  Vignuda  de
SouzaII  Lia Leo CiuffoII Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro.
Maca, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.  Universidade  Federal  do  Rio  de
Janeiro.   Rio  de  Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.  Christoffel
MM, Gomes ALM, Souza TV, Ciuffo LL.  Childrens (in)visibility  in
social  vulnerability  and  the  impact  of the novel coronavirus
(COVID‐19).  Ana Leticia Monteiro Gomes EDITOR  IN  CHIEF:  Dulce
Barbosa ASSOCIATE EDITOR: Antonio Jos de Almeida Filho Objective:
To examine the impact of the infection by the  novel  coronavirus
on  Brazilian children in situation of social vulnerability based
on the Millennium Sustainable Development Goals. Method:  Reflec‐
tive  study  based  on  discursive  formulation in three aspects:
principles of the objectives and goals for  the  millennium  sus‐
tainable  development;  impact  of  the pandemic on the health of
children and their families living in social  vulnerability;  and
the  role  of pediatric nursing in the care provided ‐ limits and
challenges. Results: In January 2020, the news of COVID 19 is re‐
leased  as a pandemic. In Brazil, children and families are still
without access to basic rights, thereby increasing their risks of
social vulnerability because of the quarantine. The nursing field
has an important role in monitoring children and their  families,
offering guidance in search for solutions and preventing contami‐
nation. Conclusion: There are still challenges to be overcome  by
the  children  and  their families in situations of vulnerability
against COVID‐19.  Descriptors: Coronavirus Infections; Children;
Vulnerable  Population;  Sustainable Development; Pediatric Nurs‐
ing.  Objetivo: Refletir sobre o  impacto  da  infeco  pelo  novo
coronavrus  nas  crianas brasileiras em situao de vulnerabilidade
social, com base nos Objetivos de Desenvolvimento  Sustentvel  do
Milnio.  Mtodo: Estudo reflexivo fundamentado na formulao discur‐
siva em trs momentos: princpios dos objetivos e das metas de  de‐
senvolvimento  sustentvel  do milnio; impacto da pandemia na sade
das crianas e famlias em vulnerabilidade social; e o papel da en‐
fermagem  peditrica  nos  cuidados prestados  limites e desafios.
Resultados: Em janeiro de 2020, a COVID19   divulgada  como  pan‐
demia. No Brasil, crianas e famlias ainda se encontram sem acesso
a direitos bsicos, aumentando os riscos de vulnerabilidade social
pela  quarentena.  A  enfermagem  tem papel relevante no acompan‐
hamento das crianas e suas famlias, oferecendo orientaes na busca
de  solues  e  na preveno da contaminao.  Concluso: Ainda existem
desafios a serem superados pelas crianas e suas famlias em situao
de  vulnerabilidade diante da COVID‐19.  Descritores: Infeces por
Coronavrus; Criana; Vulnerabilidade Social; Desenvolvimento  Sus‐
tentvel;  Enfermagem  Peditrica.   Objetivo: Reflexionar sobre el
impacto de la infeccin por  el  nuevo  coronavirus  en  los  nios
brasileos  en  situacin de vulnerabilidad social, con base en los
Objetivos de Desarrollo discursiva en tres  momentos:  principios
de  los objetivos y de las metas de desarrollo vulnerabilidad so‐
cial; y el papel  de  la  enfermera  peditrica  en  los  cuidados
prestados   lmites  y  desafos.  Resultados: En enero de 2020, el
COVID‐19 ha sido divulgado como pandemia.  En Brasil, nios y  fa‐
milias  an se encuentran sin acceso a derechos bsicos, aumentando
los riesgos de vulnerabilidad social por la cuarentena. La enfer‐
mera  tiene papel relevante en el acompaamiento de los nios y sus
familias, ofreciendo orientaciones en la bsqueda de soluciones  y
en  la  prevencin de la contaminacin. Conclusin: An hay desafos a
ser superados por los nios y sus familias en situacin de vulnera‐
bilidad  delante  del  COVID‐19.  Enfermera Peditrica.  Childrens
(in)visibility in social vulnerability and the impact of the nov‐
el  coronavirus  (COVID  19) Christoffel MM, Gomes ALM, Souza TV,
Ciuffo LL.  In early December 2019, several cases of pneumonia of
unknown  origin emerged in Wuhan, Hubei province, China. Most pa‐
tients diagnosed with this pneumonia  reported  exposure  to  the
Wholesale  Seafood  Market, which sells many species of live ani‐
mals(1).  On January 3, 2020, a new  member  of  the  coronavirus
family  was identified in samples of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid
from a patient in Wuhan. The novel virus has  been  confirmed  by
the  Chinese  Center  for  Disease  Control and Prevention as the
cause of the disease under investigation and has  spread  rapidly
across  China  and  other continents(1).  On January 7, 2020, the
World Health Organization (WHO) named the newly discovered  etio‐
logic  agent  as the novel coronavirus, which causes Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome, also known as SARS‐CoV‐2  or  COVID‐19  (so
named  on February 11, 2020)(1).  On January 11, WHO declared the
issue as a public  health  emergency  of  international  concern,
since the virus was spreading worldwide, and it was characterized
as a pandemic. By that time several countries  had  already  con‐
firmed cases of COVID‐19, including the United States of America,
Germany and Japan(1).  COVID‐19 affects all age  groups,  varying
from  mild  symptoms to severe respiratory conditions, especially
severe pneumonia.  Symptoms include fever, cough,  nasal  conges‐
tion,  runny nose, sore throat, but there may also be an increase
in respiratory rate, wheezing and pneumonia up  to  severe  acute
respiratory  syndrome,  or,  in  some cases, respiratory failure.
Gastrointestinal symptoms such as vomiting and diarrhea can  also
happen,  but are more common in children than in adults(1‐2).  As
far as the childrens age is concerned, the  data  show  that,  so
far,  infection with SARS‐CoV‐2 rarely affects children; and when
children manifest symptoms of the disease, they  are  most  often
mild.  Thus, in most cases, children are asymptomatic carriers of
the virus. However, their potential to transmit the virus has not
been  ruled  out  even  if  they  do not show clinical manifesta‐
tions(1‐2).  A type of medical research conducted in China, known
as   clinical  series,  tracked  2,143  pediatric  patients  with
COVID‐19 reported to the Chinese Center for Disease  Control  and
Prevention,  from January 16 to February 8, 2020. The results re‐
vealed 731 (34.1%) laboratory confirmed cases and  1,412  (65.9%)
suspected  cases.  The average age of all cases in children was 7
years (interquartile range: 2‐13), and 1,213 cases  (56.6%)  were
boys.  Over 90% of all cases in children were asymptomatic, mild,
or moderate. The median time from disease onset to diagnosis  was
2  days (interval: 0 to 42 days). They reached a conclusion that,
although the clinical manifestations of COVID‐19 cases  in  chil‐
dren  were  generally  less  severe than in adult patients, young
children, especially babies, were vulnerable to the infection(1).
Recent  results from another Chinese study show that of the total
reported cases of the disease, only 0.9%  occurred  in  children,
totaling  416  cases  in the range of 0 to 9 years, none of which
evolved to death; in relation to adolescents from 10 to 19  years
of  age,  549 cases (1.2%) were totaled, with 1 death (0.1%) of a
13‐year‐old adolescent. The lethality rate is  0.2%  in  patients
between  10  and  19 years of age(3).  Based on limited, however,
current evidence, on March 30, 2020, the American Academy of  Pe‐
diatrics  and  the Brazilian Society of Pediatrics, and following
suit, on April 6, 2020, the Brazilian Association of Midwives and
Obstetric  Nurses  and the Brazilian Society of Pediatric Nurses,
provided temporary guidance for clinical management  of  newborns
of  mothers with suspected or confirmed diagnosis of COVID‐19, as
well as clinical management of children with the  virus.  It  was
also  informed  that,  until  then, vertical transmission had not
been proven(2).  In Brazil, until 04:00  PM  on  April  6,  2020,
12,056  cases  were confirmed, 553 deaths and a lethality rate of
4.6%, but there was no age stratification from those infected. It
is  known  that 58% (n = 7,046) of confirmed cases are located in
the Southeast region. The state of Rio de Janeiro holds 1,461  of
the  total  cases,  8 of them are children 0 to 10 years old. The
data reveal 71 deaths, showing a lethality rate of 4.9%, but with
no  deaths registered in the age group from 0 to 10 years old un‐
til then(4).  In facing this pandemic, it is necessary to reflect
on  the  sustainable  development  of  the millennium in times of
COVID‐19, as many are the challenges to combat  the  pandemic  in
children and families in situations of social vulnerability.  Re‐
flect on the impact of the infection by the novel coronavirus  on
Brazilian  children in situations of social vulnerability consid‐
ering the Millennium Sustainable Development Goals.  It is a  re‐
flective  study based on discursive formulation in three aspects:
the principles of the objectives and goals of sustainable  devel‐
opment  of  the  millennium;  the  impact  of the pandemic on the
health of children and families in social vulnerability; and  the
role of pediatric nursing in the care provided ‐ limits and chal‐
lenges.  The principles of the Millennium Sustainable Development
Goals  and  the  challenges  before and after COVID‐19 The Agenda
2030 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) comprise 17  objectives
and  169 goals and can be defined as a model to provide the inte‐
gration between economy, society and the environment, that is, it
is the notion that economic growth must take into account not on‐
ly social inclusion, but also environmental protection(5).  These
goals  involve  fields  or  topics  relevant  to  improving child
health, such as poverty eradication, food security  and  agricul‐
ture, good health, education, gender equality, reducing inequali‐
ty, energy, clean water and sanitation, sustainable  patterns  of
production  and  consumption, climate action, sustainable cities,
protection and sustainable usage of  resources  from  oceans  and
terrestrial  ecosystems,  comprehensive  economic  growth, infra‐
structure and industrialization, organization and means  for  im‐
plementing  those policies(5).  In this sense, the area of mater‐
nal, neonatal and child health stands out as a  great  challenge,
since  many  women and children live in vulnerable conditions and
must be made aware of their rights. To this end, it is  necessary
to  undertake  efforts  to  strengthen  public policies to assist
these groups.  Childrens (in)visibility in  social  vulnerability
and  the  impact  of the novel coronavirus (COVID 19) Christoffel
MM, Gomes ALM, Souza TV, Ciuffo LL.  Whereas  the  needs  experi‐
enced  by  certain populations and people in social vulnerability
place them in a situation where greater social and  health  needs
arise,  the lack of access to quality health services, treatments
and  technologies  has  a  negative  effect  on  the  health  and
life/death  of  these social groups(6), especially with regard to
the childrens public, since children exposed  to  adverse  health
conditions, if they survive, may present problems in their growth
and development.  According to  UNICEF  (2020),  some  millennium
sustainable  development goals are directly connected to the top‐
ics without girls and boys cannot  survive,  thrive  and  develop
their  full against poverty(5).  From the health perspective, the
social determinants, the need to strengthen  health  systems  and
the  social safety net affect the health of children and families
in vulnerable situations, such as people living in informal  set‐
tlements,  homeless people, populations in rural areas, children,
people with disabilities, immigrants, refugees,  people  at  risk
from  disaster  and all other vulnerable groups.  In 2000, Brazil
was considered a country of high social  vulnerability,  but  had
this  index  reduced, in 2010, to the middle social vulnerability
range. The social vulnerability index (SoVI) is calculated  based
on  three  dimensions:  income and work; human capital; and urban
infrastructure(7).  It is known that Brazilian macro‐regional in‐
equalities are still maintained, in which the North and Northeast
present predominantly higher SoVI, while the cities of  the  Cen‐
ter‐South  of the country present better results, with a decrease
of this index(7).  Regarding the Brazilian  human  infrastructure
dimension, there are still populations living in urban households
without garbage collection service and with inadequate water sup‐
ply  and  sanitation(7).   In relation to human capital, we still
have children who do not do not learn even the basic skills.  The
goal  on education addresses access to learning opportunities and
the quality of teaching.  The SDGs  on  poverty,  inequality  and
gender  discrimination highlight that children and their families
are not receiving fair opportunities, therefore there is  a  need
for  actions  to strengthen social protection systems(5).  Conse‐
quently, the objectives and SDGs to be achieved are  complex  and
require an investment in time to create public policies that will
address so many issues  concerning  citizens  rights,  especially
childrens  rights.  It is noted that issues related to the situa‐
tion of social vulnerability still present today in Brazil and in
other  countries,  were already in place before the COVID‐19 pan‐
demic. Therefore, it is necessary to reflect  on  the  impact  of
this infection on the achievement of the objectives and SDGs pro‐
posed for the year 2030, with a view to reducing this vulnerabil‐
ity.   Impact of the pandemic on the health of children and fami‐
lies in social vulnerability Social  vulnerability  can  be  per‐
ceived as the resilience of communities when confronted by exter‐
nal health stressors such as natural or human‐made  disasters  or
disease  epidemics. Reducing social vulnerability can reduce both
human suffering and economic losses(8).  Based on the  above‐men‐
tioned  concept,  the elements considered of vulnerability in the
childs development and social inequities according to the  nurses
point  of  view  who  is integrated in the Family Health Strategy
are: low parental education; unemployment; low  income;  lack  of
basic sanitation; precarious housing situation; no access to pro‐
fessionalization, social programs and vacancies in  daycare  cen‐
ters. It is important to note that vulnerability in childrens de‐
velopment is also related  to  socioeconomic  elements  and  that
their  understanding extends beyond the biological and individual
components of childrens In developing countries, one of the  most
important  aspects that must be highlighted is the contradictions
between what is a citizens right and the scope of  the  less  fa‐
vored  population to these rights, especially regarding basic is‐
sues such as housing, So, at this time of  the  pandemic  of  the
novel  coronavirus,  according  to the recommendation of the Min‐
istry of Health, in compliance with the National Contingency Plan
for Human Infection by the novel Coronavirus, there must be a so‐
cial isolation, whose main measures are: strict hand hygiene  and
respiratory etiquette, as well as to avoid crowding, to adopt so‐
cial distancing measures, such as maintaining a  4.92  feet  dis‐
tance apart from another person when outdoors, but mainly to stay
indoors, except for those who work in essential activities,  such
as  supermarkets,  pharmacies, health units and others.  However,
in order to meet these measures, it is necessary  to  reflect  on
which  part of the Brazilian population lives in communities that
do not have adequate infrastructure and  basic  sanitation,  thus
presenting  difficulties  in relation to personal hygiene and the
environment. Many families live in narrow  rooms,  in  conditions
that  do not favor isolation in case someone becomes contaminated
with the coronavirus. The main source of family income  is  often
obtained from informal and face‐to‐face activities, making it im‐
possible to do their work remotely, among  many  other  problems.
Therefore,  the  pandemic of the novel coronavirus (COVID‐19) may
change the reality experienced by children  for  worse,  in  view
disrupt  childrens  routine and social support, adding new stress
on parents and custodians, who must find new options to care  for
the  children  at home, such as offering activities and food that
The marginalization and discrimination related  to  COVID‐19  can
make  children  more  exposed  to violence and psychological dis‐
tress, that is, children and families who are already  vulnerable
due to socio‐economic exclusion or those who living in overcrowd‐
ed places are particularly at risk(10).  Role  of  the  pediatric
nurse  providing  health care ‐ limits and challenges in times of
pandemic of the novel coronavirus It is clear that nursing  prac‐
tice  should  be  aligned with other professionals and sectors of
the health area, in order to  seek  the  convergence  of  actions
aimed  at  patients,  in  a  joint  effort  that allows Childrens
(in)visibility in social vulnerability and the impact of the nov‐
el  coronavirus  (COVID  19) Christoffel MM, Gomes ALM, Souza TV,
Ciuffo LL.  the exchange of knowledge and enhances the  offer  of
more  effective and resolutive care with a view to full attention
to the patient.  Nursing practices should also be attuned to  the
demands  and  needs of their territories. Among these demands are
both those related to the care of children and their families  in
situations of social vulnerability during the pandemic, and those
related to the Federal Constitution(6).  In this line, it is  es‐
sential that nursing works its technical and scientific knowledge
with the childrens families in  order  to  promote  actions  that
transform reality in order to empower them, of the entire popula‐
tion.  Among the transformative actions mentioned above, we high‐
light  those  related  to  the education of children and families
about the pandemic prevention measures,  such  as  frequent  hand
washing with soap and water, the correct and rational use of sup‐
plies such as hand sanitizer with 70% gel alcohol and  masks  for
personal  protection.  In addition, the nursing staff should also
advise on cleaning and disinfecting household environments  using
cloths  moistened  with disinfectant products in the correct con‐
centration ‐ for example, sodium hypochlorite.  Such personal hy‐
giene  and  environmental  measures  are  the  basis  of Florence
Nightingales environmentalist theory, which, to this day, is  one
of the main foundations of our profession. It is necessary to ex‐
plain that to the general population and especially to the  chil‐
dren,  since  they  are  often  the ones who learn and spread the
knowledge wherever they go.  The nursing staff and the  pediatric
nurse  also play an important role in assisting during a possible
hospitalization of the child.  However, in order  for  assistance
to  occur  in  the manner recommended, it is necessary to discuss
issues related to the lack of provision of individual  protection
resources  and technologies, for nursing to provide risk‐free as‐
sistance to itself.  The challenges for the practice  of  nursing
go  beyond the acquisition of resources and technology, and it is
necessary to invest in this professional in order to have  knowl‐
edge  about inequalities, it is necessary to create intersectoral
instances, beyond the scope of the health  field,  that  converge
their  resources  in the formulation of public policies that pro‐
vide the guarantee of the full enjoyment of social rights by  all
people  of  our society and of the planetary community(6).  Study
limitations The central idea of the study is not to exhaust  con‐
cepts,  theories, methods and possibilities concerning the impact
of the infection by the novel coronavirus in Brazilian  children,
but  to provoke reflections to achieve the Millennium Sustainable
Development Goals and also to point out guidelines that may  sus‐
tain  the  debates  between  educational and health institutions.
Contributions to the field processes and to health  institutions,
since  it  brings  updated  evidence.  In this perspective, it is
thought that the considerations now exposed are valuable  to  the
nursing  action before the child and the family in a situation of
social vulnerability. This being said, the contribution  of  this
study is found in the possibilities of health actions that encom‐
pass the inclusion of vulnerable  populations  in  the  Brazilian
context,  aiming  at  the  improvement  of  care  and services in
health.  It is concluded that, in line with the sustainable  mil‐
lennium  goals,  there  are  still  challenges to be overcome for
children and hygiene and responding to the decrease in family in‐
come  through quarantine. In this sense, pediatric nursing has an
important role in promoting prevention measures, as  well  as  in
detecting  and  evaluating  suspected cases of COVID‐19. In addi‐
tion, nursing professionals should advocate for ensuring the full
enjoyment of social rights, especially for the children and their
families.  Dong Y, Mo X, Hu Y, Qi X, Jiang F,  Jiang  Z,  et  al.
Epidemiological  characteristics  of 2143 pediatric patients with
2019 coronavirus disease in  Sociedade  Brasileira  de  Pediatria
(BR).  Departamento  cientfico  de  infectologia. Orientaes a Re‐
speito da Infeco pelo SARS‐CoV‐2 The Novel Coronavirus  Pneumonia
Emergency  Response  Epidemiology  Team. CDC‐China (CH). The Epi‐
demiological Characteristics of an  Childrens  (in)visibility  in
social  vulnerability  and  the  impact  of the novel coronavirus
(COVID 19) Christoffel  MM,  Gomes  ALM,  Souza  TV,  Ciuffo  LL.
Aliana  para  a Proteo da Criana em Aes Humanitrias. Nota Tcnica:
Proteo da Criana durante a Pandemia do Coronavrus[Internet].


























































