ORIGINAL  ARTICLE  Hand  hygiene in high‐complexity sectors as an
integrating element in the combat of Sars‐CoV‐2 Higiene  das  mos
em  setores de alta complexidade como elemento integrador no com‐
bate do Sars‐CoV‐2 Higiene de las manos en sectores de alta  com‐
plejidad  como  elemento  integrador en el combate del Sras‐CoV‐2
Danielle Galdino de PaulaI Marianna Ramos FranciscoI Juliana Dias
FreitasII Renata Christine Quintella LevachofI Bianca de Oliveira
FonsecaIII Objective: to perform a situational diagnosis  of  the
behavior  of  health  professionals concerning hand hygiene prac‐
tices in highly‐complex sectors. Methods: this  quantitative  and
retrospective study was based on reports (2016 and 2017) of Adult
and Pediatric ICUs of a Federal hospital in Rio de  Janeiro.  Re‐
sults:  one  thousand  two  hundred fifty‐eight opportunities for
hand hygiene were analysed. The chance of professionals  sanitiz‐
ing  hands in Pediatric ICUs is 41.61% higher than in Adult ICUs.
Concerning proper hand hygiene, the medical  team  had  a  39.44%
lower  chance  than  the  nursing team. Others had a 30.62% lower
chance when compared to the nursing team. The moment  after  con‐
tact  with the patient presented 4.5275 times the chance in rela‐
tion before contact with the patient.  Conclusion:  in  front  of
hand  hygiene recommendations to control COVID‐19, diagnostic as‐
sessment and previous analysis of the behavior  of  professionals
proved  to  be  positive.  Descriptors: SARS Virus; Hand Hygiene;
Cross Infection; Intensive Care Units; Nursing.  Bruno  Francisco
Teixeira  SimesI  Rafael  de Lima BilioIV Universidade Federal do
Estado do Rio de  Janeiro.   Rio  de  Janeiro,  Rio  de  Janeiro,
Brazil.   Kiel, Schleswig‐Holstein, Germany.  Hospital Federal da
Lagoa. Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro , Brazil.   Fundao  Oswaldo
Cruz.  Rio  de  Janeiro,  Rio  de Janeiro , Brazil.  De Paula DG,
Francisco MR, Freitas JD, Levachof RCQ, Fonseca BO, Simes BFT, et
al. Hand hygiene in highcomplexity sectors as an integrating ele‐
ment in the combat Danielle Galdino de  Paula  EDITOR  IN  CHIEF:
Dulce  Aparecida Barbosa ASSOCIATE EDITOR: Antonio Jos de Almeida
Filho Objetivo: realizar um diagnstico situacional  do  comporta‐
mento de profissionais de sade quanto s prticas de higienizao das
mos em setores de alta complexidade.  Mtodos: estudo  quantitati‐
vo, retrospectivo, baseado em relatrios (anos de 2016 e 2017) dos
setores CTI Adulto e Peditrico de um hospital Federal do  Rio  de
Janeiro.   Resultados:  analisaram‐se  1.258  oportunidades  para
higiene das mos. A chance de um profissional higienizar as mos no
CTI  Peditrico  41,61% maior que no CTI Adulto. Quanto higienizar
as mos adequadamente, a equipe mdica obteve chance  39,44%  menor
que  a  equipe de enfermagem e outros tiveram chance 30,62% menor
quando comparada  equipe da enfermagem. O momento aps  o  contato
com  o paciente apresentou 4,5275 vezes a chance em relao a antes
do contato  com  o  paciente.  Concluso:  frente   recomendao  da
higiene das mos no controle da COVID‐19, avaliao diagnstica e an‐
lise prvia do comportamento dos profissionais demonstrou ser pos‐
itiva.  Descritores: Vrus da SARS; Higiene das Mos; Infeco Hospi‐
talar; Unidades de Terapia Intensiva; Enfermagem.  Objetivo:  re‐
alizar un diagnstico situacional del comportamiento de los profe‐
sionales de la salud con respecto a las prcticas  de  higiene  de
manos  en sectores altamente complejos. Mtodos: estudio cuantita‐
tivo, retrospectivo, basado en informes (aos 2016 y 2017) de  los
sectores  de  UCI  Adultos y Peditricos de un hospital federal en
Rio de Janeiro.  Resultados: se analizaron 1.258 oportunidades de
higiene de manos. La posibilidad de un lavado de manos profesion‐
al en la UCI Peditrica es 41.61% mayor que  en  la  UCI  Adultos.
Con  respecto a la higiene de las manos, el equipo mdico tuvo una
probabilidad 39.44% menor que el equipo de enfermera y otros  tu‐
vieron  una probabilidad 30.62% menor en comparacin con el equipo
de enfermera. El momento despus del contacto con el paciente  fue
4.5275  veces  mayor que antes del contacto con el paciente. Con‐
clusin: contra la recomendacin de higiene de manos en el  control
de COVID‐19, la evaluacin diagnstica y el anlisis previo del com‐
portamiento de los  profesionales  resultaron  ser  Descriptores:
Virus  del  SRAS;  Higiene  de  las Manos; Infeccin Hospitalaria;
Unidades de Cuidados  Intensivos;  Enfermera.   Hand  hygiene  in
high‐complexity  sectors  as an integrating element in the combat
of Sars‐Cov‐2 De Paula DG, Francisco  MR,  Freitas  JD,  Levachof
RCQ, Fonseca BO, Simes BFT, et al.  The emerging COVID‐19 disease
caused by the Sars‐CoV‐2 virus was  first  identified  in  Wuhan,
China,  in  December 2019. The virus has caused a pandemic and is
spreading rapidly and, in many countries,  increased  demand  for
health  services  by people with disease‐related complications is
reported, which may overwhelm/ collapse health systems  and  high
demand  for hospitalization in high‐complexity sectors(1).  Stud‐
ies have shown that analysis of surfaces of  objects  present  in
wards  and  toilets of patients in isolation with COVID‐19 showed
positive results of the pathogen on environmental surfaces.  hos‐
pital  bed  grid,  closet,  chair, light switches, doors (inhaled
door handle),  windows,  and  toilet  surfaces(2‐3).   The  World
Health  Organization (WHO), Pan American Health Organization (PA‐
HO) and government health agencies have been considering hand hy‐
giene  (HH) as one of the preventive integrative actions. This is
because there is sufficient scientific evidence  supported  that,
if  properly implemented, HH can significantly reduce the risk of
transmission of the virus Sars‐CoV‐2 in society and  health  ser‐
vices(4‐5).   In  this context, WHO develops actions and policies
related to the incentive of HH, where this practice  was  already
analysed  in  health  environments, as one of the key elements in
the control of infection in a hospital environment(6).   Although
HH  is a simple, fast and economically viable action, non‐compli‐
ance with this technique by health professionals is still consid‐
ered  a challenge in infection control in health services(7).  To
perform a situational diagnosis of the behavior of health profes‐
sionals concerning HH practices in highly‐complex sectors.  Ethi‐
cal aspects REC approved the study and CAAE (Certificado de Apre‐
sentao para Apreciao tica ‐ Certificate of Presentation for Ethi‐
cal Consideration). The study is in  compliance  with  Resolution
466/12  of  the  Brazilian  National Health Council (Conselho Na‐
cional de Sade) on research involving human  beings.   Study  de‐
sign,  period, and place This cross‐sectional, retrospective, and
quantitative study was developed from reports  referring  to  the
years  2016  and  2017, obtained through studies conducted by the
Hospital Infection Control Service (HICS) of a  Federal  hospital
based  in  the city of Rio de Janeiro.  The Strengthening the Re‐
porting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) initia‐
tive  was  used to assist in the methodological conduction of the
study.  Population and sample; inclusion and  exclusion  criteria
The  bank used for the analyses was constructed from observations
made and based on the Guide to the Implementation of the WHO Mul‐
timodal  Hand  Hygiene  Improvement Strategy(8). According to the
WHO, this is an assisting guide on HH in health services  to  im‐
prove   practice   and  reduce  healthcare‐associated  infections
(HAIs).  The observations contained in the reports were  made  in
the period of August, September and October 2016 and in June, Ju‐
ly, August and September 2017. This period was chosen, as it  was
months  subsequent to the educational strategies of HH held annu‐
ally at the institution. The observations contained in the report
were  made  during the morning and afternoon, from Monday to Fri‐
day, except holidays.  As an inclusion criterion, it was  decided
to  analyse  only the data referring to the sectors of the Inten‐
sive Care Center (ICU) of Adult and Pediatric units, as they  are
sectors  previously described in literature with a high incidence
of multi‐resistant microorganisms.  Observations related to  com‐
panions  and visitors were not reported, therefore, they were ex‐
cluded from the analysis.  The study population  was  all  health
professionals  who  worked  in the high complexity sector. Subse‐
quently, this population was categorized as  assistants,  nursing
technicians and nurses, as a nursing team; doctors, such as medi‐
cal staff. Physiotherapists,  speech  therapists,  nutritionists,
nutrition  and  laboratory technicians and general service assis‐
tants were categorized as others.  Study  protocol  We  tried  to
categorize  the  teams  in order to have a larger sample size and
obtain more statistically significant results for this study. The
choice  by  all  professionals  is due to the recommendation con‐
tained in the Guide to the Implementation of the  WHO  Multimodal
Hand Hygiene Improvement Strategy, since it is based on the prin‐
ciple that all professionals should have a safe practice, the re‐
alization  of the five moments of HH according to the recommenda‐
tions of the ANVISA/WHO protocol(8).   In  data  collection,  the
convenience  sampling  technique  was  used,  a non‐probabilistic
technique, where sample became composed of the opportunities that
arose in the analysed period. The data from reports were compiled
into spreadsheets of the Microsoft Excel 2013  Program  and  ana‐
lysed  using R 3.4.2.  The actions (opportunities) were presented
as HH, performing it incorrectly or not performing HH. These  ac‐
tions,  when performed (correctly or inappropriately), were asso‐
ciated with the five moments of HH as before contact with the pa‐
tient,  before  the aseptic procedure, after the risk of exposure
to body fluids, after contact with the patient and with  surfaces
close  to the patient(8).  Analysis of results, and statistics We
opted for multiple correspondence analysis (MCA), because it is a
multivariate  statistical  analysis  technique  that  allows  the
graphic visualization of the most  important  associations  of  a
large set of variables among themselves. With MCA, it is possible
to assess which actions, based on the five moments of HH and  al‐
coholic solution or water and soap use, were more associated with
professional categories. Thus, relationships of proximity and op‐
position  of behavior between professional categories and the ac‐
tions observed(9) are defined.  We chose the chi‐square  test  to
verify  statistical  significance in the associations between the
variables analysed in this study.  Hand hygiene in high‐complexi‐
ty  sectors as an integrating element in the combat of Sars‐Cov‐2
De Paula DG, Francisco MR, Freitas JD, Levachof RCQ, Fonseca  BO,
Simes  BFT,  et  al.  related to the other category. In Pediatric
ICUs, we had a total of 156 opportunities, 83 of which  were  re‐
lated  to  the  nursing team, 49 were related to the medical team
and 24 were related to the other category.  Based on the reports,
1,258  opportunities  for  HH were observed.  In both years, 2016
and 2017, the nursing team totaled the largest number of opportu‐
nities  observed. This result is related to the work activity de‐
veloped by the nursing team,  since  intensive  care  is  charac‐
terAdult  Intensive  Care  Unit ized by direct care, implying the
performance Pediatric Intensive Care Unit MCA ‐ Biplot of several
procedures  in  the  patient.  For the readers understanding, the
sectors (Adult ICU and Pediatric ICU) were grouped After the risk
of by year and association (times of hygiene and exposure to body
fluids solutions used), being carried out based  on  the  profes‐
sional  category  of the population studied.  PEDIATRIC INTENSIVE
CARE UNIT Water and soap Concerning the year 2016,  785  opportu‐
niBefore  contact  with the patient ties for HH were observed. Of
this total, 437 opportunities were related to  Adult  ICUs,  with
Alcoholic  solution  Not performing 284 opportunities for HH from
the nursing team, After contact with the patient  108  opportuni‐
ties  for HH from the medical After contact with surfaces Nursing
team Medical team close to the patient team and 45  opportunities
for HH from the ADULT INTENSIVE CARE UNIT others category. In the
Pediatric ICU, there were 348 opportunities, of  which  183  were
Performing  is  incorrectly opportunities for HH from the nursing
team, 86 were opportunities for HH from the medical team  and  79
were  opportunities  for  HH  in the Before the aseptic procedure
that refer to each professional category analDim1 (14.7%) ysed in
the  scenarios  contained in the reports (Adult ICU and Pediatric
ICU). There was statistipractices, 2016 cal significance  between
HH  and  solution used (chi‐square = 18.192 and p value<0.01) and
statistical significance of the professional team Adult Intensive
Care Unit in relation to the moments for HH (chi‐square Pediatric
Intensive Care Unit MCA ‐ Biplot = 52.712 and p value< 0.001). In
both sectors, the nursing team is associated with alcoholic solu‐
tion use. In relation to moments of HH, After the  risk  of  this
professional  category  is  associated  (in both exposure to body
fluids After contact with surfaces sectors)  with  after  contact
with neighbors and close to the patient Water and soap after con‐
tact with the patient. In both sectors, the medical team is asso‐
ciated  with  alcoholic  Nursing team Not performing solution and
not performing hygiene. As for opportunities, the medical team is
associated Before the aseptic procedure with after proximity, af‐
ter contact with the After contact with the patient  patient  and
before contact with the patient.  Alcoholic solution The category
others is associated with water  Performing  is  incorrectly  and
soap  use or not performed related to Medical team Before contact
with the patient the moments of HH. The actions were more associ‐
ated with Pediatric ICUs, being after risk of exposure and before
contact with the patient.  In the reports for the year 2017,  473
opportunities  for  HH were observed. Of this total, 194 observa‐
tions of HH opportunity were related to Adult ICUs, with 118  op‐
portunities  referring  to the nursing team, 32 opportunities re‐
lated to the medical team and 44 opportunities  Hand  hygiene  in
high‐complexity  sectors  as an integrating element in the combat
of Sars‐Cov‐2 De Paula DG, Francisco  MR,  Freitas  JD,  Levachof
RCQ,  Fonseca  BO,  Simes BFT, et al.  considering water and soap
and/or alcoholic solution use as a dependent variable  (2016  and
2017)  Moment  of (95% CI) OR Before contact with the patient Be‐
fore the aseptic After contact with the 593  After  contact  with
After  risk  of  exposure  Adult  ICU Pediatric ICU Note: *p val‐
ue<0.01; **p value<0.001; ***number of observation opportunities.
As for the category of health professionals, the nursing team was
used as a reference for analysis. When this category is  compared
to  the medical team, OR = 0.6056 and p value<0.001 are observed,
that is, the medical team has a 39.44% lower chance of performing
the  HH  procedure  with the inputs appropriate.  The others team
had OR = 0.6938 and p  value<0.01,  i.e.,  with  a  30.62%  lower
chance  of performing hygiene properly when compared to the nurs‐
ing team.  Regarding the moments of HH, taking as a reference the
time of cleaning before contact with the patient, one of the most
relevant ORs found was related to the time of cleaning after con‐
tact  with the patient, with OR = 4.5275 and p value<0.001, i.e.,
4.5275 times the chance in relation to the procedure before  con‐
tact  with  the patient.  Resposta. SAeAS.  Setor effect plot CTI
ADULTO CTI PEDITRICO Resposta. SAeAS.  Momento. effect plot  Ant.
Proc.  Ap. Risco de Exp.  Categoria. effect plot Resposta. SAeAS.
studied in 2017 (Adult ICU and Pediatric ICU). There was  statis‐
tical significance between the categories and the type of hygiene
(chi‐square = 18.594 and p value<0.01) and  statistical  signifi‐
cance  between the moments for HH (chi‐square = 28.159 and p val‐
ue<0.001) and the type of professional  team  evaluated.  It  was
found  that  the behavior of the groups in both sectors was simi‐
lar. The nursing team is associated with soap and water and alco‐
holic  solution use. In relation to the moments of HH, this cate‐
gory is associated with before the aseptic procedure, after  con‐
tact  with  the patient, after contact with neighbors, after risk
of exposure and after proximity. The medical team was  associated
with  inadequate  hygiene and alcoholic solution use. In relation
to moments of HH, this category is associated with before contact
with  the patient, before the aseptic procedure and after contact
with the patient. The category others was associated with  inade‐
quate  hygiene,  and  when performing HH, it uses alcoholic solu‐
tion, and the action is associated with before contact  with  the
patient  and  before the aseptic procedure.  regression, with and
soap and/or alcoholic solution use as a dependent variable  as  a
dependent variable in the act of hand hygiene the main effects of
the variables on the dependent variable. In relation to the  sec‐
tor,  in  the analysed periods (2016 and 2017), the Odds Ratio of
health professionals to perform HH in Pediatric  ICUs  was  OR  =
1.42, i.e., 42% higher than in Adult ICUs (p value<0.01).  Equipe
de Enfermagem Equipe Mdica solution use as a  dependent  variable
(2016  and 2017) Educational actions carried out in 2016 and 2017
Educational activities in 2016 were held in July  and  lasted  30
days. They started with the event entitled Hand Hygiene Day, with
hands was created in order to encourage the  correct  performance
of  HH  and to recall the five critical moments for HH. Moreover,
demonstration was carried out on culture plates with unhygienized
hands,  hands  sanitized  with water and soap and hands sanitized
with alcoholic solution. Culture plates aimed to  materialize  on
the  concrete  plane about the effectiveness of HH with alcoholic
solution use. It was associated with that moment, the  clarifica‐
tion  of  any  doubts and awareness of professionals about HH, at
the right time and in the right way, in the  prevention  of  HAI.
Hand hygiene in high‐complexity sectors as an integrating element
in the combat of Sars‐Cov‐2 De Paula DG,  Francisco  MR,  Freitas
JD,  Levachof  RCQ,  Fonseca BO, Simes BFT, et al.  At the end of
the Campaign, observations began in the sectors  (Adult  ICU  and
Pediatric ICU) of the institution. From the results of the analy‐
sis carried out in 2016, new guidelines were established for edu‐
cational  actions  of  the  following year.  HH activities of the
year were held in May and lasted 30 days. The  following  strate‐
gies  were  determined:  1) observation professionals; 2) mainte‐
nance of the dynamics of the black box, as it was  observed  that
many professionals were encouraged to participate in the Campaign
out of curiosity; 3) maintenance of the poster provided by ANVISA
about  HH(10). The posters provided explanatory information about
the five moments of HH; 4) a sector‐based approach aimed at medi‐
cal  professionals  based on analysis in the previous year. After
the end of the activities, the  observations  based  on  the  WHO
guide began(8).  Finally, the performance of a diagnostic evalua‐
tion, through the previous observation of  the  professionals  HH
practices,  is  reported  as  essential in studies related to the
theme, since it seeks to know the groups  performance,  thus  en‐
abling  focused strategies(11).  Repercussions of educational ac‐
tions (year 2016 and 2017) The analysis for  2016  and  2017  was
concerned  with the fact that dynamic activities aimed at raising
the awareness of professionals about HH were carried out. Accord‐
ing to the Guide to the Implementation of the WHO Multimodal Hand
Hygiene Improvement Strategy, direct observational surveys should
be  carried out without the knowledge of the professionals in fo‐
cus, as it is thus possible to obtain an assessment  that  avoids
the  hawthorne  effect. This effect consists of a forced positive
change in the behavior of a group of workers in relation  to  the
objectives  of a company/institution, management, direction or by
some higher hierarchical sphere(12). In the study, compliance was
reported  in  terms  of avoiding this effect.  There is a greater
Odds Ratio of professionals to perform HH in Pediatric ICUs  when
compared  to  Adult  ICUs.  This  result may be associated with a
greater participation of Pediatric ICU professionals  in  hygiene
and  involvement campaigns of HICS professionals, continuing edu‐
cation, sectorial heads, and nursing residents.  The  involvement
of  these  professionals  may  have been a decisive factor in the
greater adherence to the practice of HH in Pediatric  ICUs.   An‐
other  aspect  may  be related to the pediatric environment. A in
southern Brazil showed that professionals working in this  sector
have  a greater chance of developing and increasing strategies to
improve care to children and their families(13).  As for the pop‐
ulation  analysed,  the nursing team obtained a higher Odds Ratio
in performing HH and, in 2017, showed improvements in HH  moments
when  compared to the other professional categories studied. How‐
ever, these results are not satisfactory in view of the WHOs  de‐
terminations  regarding  the treatment of patients with COVID‐19,
but demonstrate that educational actions, through Campaigns,  had
positive  effects  on  the behavior of these professionals(4,14).
In relation to HH moments, after contact with the patient  had  a
greater  chance of occurring in the professional teams evaluated.
This result corroborates the culture of  self‐protection  and  is
similar  to  the annual report made by Kingston General (Canada),
carried out from April 2014 to March 2015. The study  shows  that
the  HH  compliance rate was 79.5% in the indications before con‐
tact and 87.5% after contact(15).  HH is an  essential  component
of  infection  prevention and control. However, this technique is
generally neglected by health professionals in developed and  de‐
veloping countries, with compliance rates below 20%(16).  The op‐
portunity of HH in the professional categories refers to the  re‐
search  carried  out  in a hospital in Porto Alegre, Brazil on HH
actions by professionals, where the culture of using gloves as  a
barrier to HH was observed (17). Evidence about glove use was de‐
scribed in the field diaries during the reports analysed  in  the
present  study.   The WHO points out that in the treatment of pa‐
tients with COVID‐19, glove use does not replace the need for  HH
and their respective action must be performed frequently(18). Al‐
lied to WHO recommendations, ANVISA (equivalent to the  USs  FDA)
reinforces  that  HH is recommended after the removal of personal
protective equipment (PPE) in isolation areas or  with  suspected
COVID‐19(19).  A study carried out in an ICU in a hospital in the
northern district of Sheung Shui/Hong Kong assessed the risks for
health  workers in the care of patients with COVID‐19. This study
reported that even using double gloves, there is a strong  recom‐
mendation for HH by health professionals(20).  Concerning the so‐
lution used, there is a variety of behavior  regarding  alcoholic
solution  and/or water and soap use. It is noteworthy that in the
analysed reports, inadequate supply or absence of limitations  of
these  elements  in the studied settings was not reported.  Water
and soap use was reported in studies  carried  out  in  countries
with  a  tropical climate, where a predilection for HH with water
and soap was noted, which directly refers to a greater  sense  of
cleanliness of the hands(21). The WHO document on rational use of
PPE for COVID‐19 recommends alcohol‐based  HH  and,  in  case  of
dirt,  water  and soap use(18).  Based on a diagnostic assessment
that covered previous observations of the behavior of profession‐
als  in highly‐complex sectors, strategic actions were determined
about HH, which would be worked on with professionals.   Evidence
shows  that  educational actions have had positive effects, espe‐
cially on nursing workers and should be developed with the aim of
guidance  and  encouragement,  in  addition to building knowledge
that  covers  biological  and  occupational  risks  in  all   as‐
pects(11,22).   Study limitations Replication in other health in‐
stitutions is suggested to verify if similar responses  occurred,
based  on  the  strategy adopted in the present study.  Contribu‐
tions to nursing, health, and public policies In view of the con‐
tamination  potential of Sars‐CoV‐2 and the high contamination of
health professionals due to the culture of not HH at  all  times,
studies that have an impact and measures to Hand hygiene in high‐
complexity sectors as an integrating element  in  the  combat  of
Sars‐Cov‐2  De  Paula DG, Francisco MR, Freitas JD, Levachof RCQ,
Fonseca BO, Simes BFT, et  al.   importance  by  national  public
health institutions in Brazil and the world. Moreover, the afore‐
mentioned study follows the role of Brazil and the  nursing  area
in advancing knowledge that requires prevention and health promo‐
tion actions.  Compliance with HH guidelines is one of the compo‐
nents  in the combat of COVID‐19 transmission in the hospital en‐
vironment.  The nursing team was more  associated  with  HH  when
compared  to  the other professional categories studied. In rela‐
tion to the moments after contact with the patient,  it  was  the
most common action, corroborating self‐protection and the culture
of using gloves as protective barriers, predisposing  HH  not  to
perform. As for the solution used for HH, there was a similar be‐
havior by professionals in the use of alcoholic solution and  wa‐
ter  and  soap.   From  the comparison between the results of the
years 2016 and 2017, it is possible to direct  continuous  adher‐
ence  strategies that can be effective in complying with HH among
health professionals. In the study, strategic  actions  based  on
diagnostic situation of the environment, previous analysis of the
behavior of health professionals and team involvement  showed  to
be  positive  in Pediatric ICUs. The replication of actions based
on such strategies can be considered in adhering to HH in  highly
complex  sectors in view of the current outbreak of COVID‐19. The
strategies used in the Campaign demonstrate that  the  deficiency
related  to  HH  compliance does not occur exclusively due to the
lack of knowledge of the HH technique and indications, but due to
the  devaluation  of  the safety culture.  In view of the current
outbreak of COVID‐19, the frequent exposure to  the  pathogen  in
sectors of high complexity predisposes professionals and patients
to acquire or transmit the infection. The removal of  PPE,  which
happens  after  contact with the patient, is also reported as one
of the essential elements that prevent contamination  of  profes‐
sionals.  Therefore, actions aimed at reducing infection and pro‐
tecting professionals,  through  simple  and  low‐cost  measures,
should be considered.  Chen X, Yu B. First two months of the 2019
Coronavirus Disease (COVID‐19) epidemic in China: real‐time  sur‐
veillance and evaluation with a Ong SWX, Tan YK, Chia PY, Lee TH,
Ng OT, Wong MSY, et al. Air, Surface Environmental, and  Personal
Protective  Equipment Contamination Organizao Panamerica de Sade.
OPAS/OMS Brasil ‐ Folha informativa  COVID‐19 (doena causada pelo
novo  coronavrus)  [Internet]. 2020 Kratzel A, Todt D, Vkovski P,
Steiner S, Gultom ML, Thao TTN, et al. Efficient inactivation  of
SARS‐CoV‐2  by  WHO‐recommended  hand  rub Chou DTS, Achan P, Ra‐
machandran M. The World Health Organization 5 Moments of Hand Hy‐
giene:  the  scientific  foundation.  J  Bone  Jt  Surg ‐ Br Vol.
2012;94‐B(4):4415.  Organizao Mundial da Sade. Agncia Nacional de
Vigilncia Sanitria. Diretrizes da oms sobre higienizao das mos na
Ministrio da Sade. Anvisa, Fiocruz. Anexo 01:  Protocolo  para  a
prtica  de higiene das mos em servios de sade. 2013;16. Available
from: uab.cat/search?f=title&p=Anlise de Correspondncia  aplicada
pesquisa  em Ensino de Cincias&sc=1&ln=ca Ministrio da Sade (BR).
Agncia Nacional de Vigilncia Sanitria. Cartaz 7 ‐ Prticas seguras
de higiene das mos para preveno de Alvim ALS. Higienizao das mos:
como reduzir o efeito Hawthorne? Assoc Min  Epidemiol  e  Control
Infeces   [Internet].  2017[cited  2020  Ribeiro  JP,  Gomes  GC,
Thofehrn MB, Porto AR, Rodrigues LPV. Ambiente de pediatria:  as‐
pectos  que auxiliam no processo de trabalho e na Hand hygiene in
high‐complexity sectors as an integrating element in  the  combat
of  Sars‐Cov‐2  De  Paula  DG, Francisco MR, Freitas JD, Levachof
RCQ, Fonseca BO, Simes BFT, et al.   World  Health  Organization‐
WHO.  Rational  use  of  personal protective equipment for coron‐
avirus disease (COVID‐19): interim guidance Lotfinejad N,  Peters
A, Pittet D. Hand hygiene and the novel coronavirus pandemic: the
role of healthcare workers. J Hosp Infect. 2020; Souza LM,  Ramos
MF,  Becker  ESS,  Meirelles  LCS, Monteiro SAO. Adherence to the
five moments for hand hygiene among intensive care Feng  S,  Shen
C,  Xia  N, Song W, Fan M, Cowling BJ. Rational use of face masks
in the COVID‐19 pandemic.  Lancet  Respir  Med.  2020;8(5):434‐6.
Agncia  Nacional  de  Vigilncia  Sanitria. Gerncia de Vigilncia e
Monitoramento em Servios de Sade, Gerncia Geral de Tecnologia  em
Servios  de Sade, Orientaes para servios de sade: medidas de pre‐
veno e controle que devem ser adotadas durante a  assistncia  aos
casos  suspeitos  ou  confirmados  de infeco pelo novo coronavrus
(SARS‐CoV‐2). [Internet]. Braslia; 2020[cited 2020 Cheung JCH, Ho
LT,  Cheng  JV,  Cham  EYK, Lam KN. Staff safety during emergency
airway management for COVID‐19 in Hong Kong. Vol. 8,




