Rev.  Latino‐Am. Enfermagem COVID‐19 and the production of knowl‐
edge regarding Victor Hugo Alves Mascarenhas1,2 Objective: to map
the  production of knowledge regarding Adriana Caroci‐Becker rec‐
ommendations for providing care to pregnant women Kelly  Cristina
Mxima Pereira Venncio3 using a broadened strategy to search data‐
bases and repositories, as well as the  reference  lists  in  the
sources Nayara Girardi Baraldi3 used. Data were collected and an‐
alyzed by two independent Adelaide Caroci Durkin4 of a narrative.
Results:  the  final  sample was composed of Maria Luiza Gonzalez
Riesco1 24 records, the content of which was synthesized in these
conceptual categories: clinical manifestations, diagnosis, treat‐
ment, working pregnant women, vaccine development, complications,
prenatal  care,  vertical transmission, and placental transmissi‐
bility. It is recommended to confirm pregnancy and disease  early
on,  to  use  technological resources for screening and providing
guidance and support to pregnant women.  Conclusion:  recommenda‐
tions  emphasize isolation, proper rest, sleep, nutrition, hydra‐
tion, medications, and in the more severe cases, oxygen  support,
monitoring  Health  Context.   of vital signs, emotional support,
and multiprofessional and Universidade de So Paulo, Escola de En‐
fermagem, So individualized care. Medications should be used with
caution Paulo, SP, Brazil.  due to a lack of evidence. Future re‐
search is needed to analyze Desenvolvimento Cientfico e Tecnolgi‐
co (CNPq), Brazil.  Universidade de So Paulo,  Escola  de  Artes,
Cincias  e  the impact of the infection at the beginning of preg‐
nancy and Humanidades, So Paulo, SP, Brazil.   the  psychological
aspects  of pregnant women infected with Kettering College, Nurs‐
ing, Kettering, OH, USA.   the  virus.   Infections;  Obstetrics;
Prenatal  Care;  Infectious Disease Transmission, Vertical.  Ve n
n c i o K C M P, B a ra l d i month day  Rev.  Latino‐Am.  Enfer‐
magem  2020;28:e3348.   infectious caused by the H1N1 virus among
pregnant women, which resulted in high rates of complications  On
December  31st,  2019  China  reported  to the and mortality(11).
World Health Organization pneumonia cases of unknown Despite  the
sensible  concern  of  international  and etiology in the city of
Wuhan, province of Hubei.  national health agencies(4,11),  there
is little scientific On January 9th, 2020 the coronavirus, scien‐
tifically evidence on the novel coronavirus and  even  less  evi‐
dence  regarding  the  management  of pregnant Coronavirus (SARS‐
CoV‐2), was identified as the most  women  testing  positive  for
SARS‐CoV‐2  or  suspected  recent microorganism causing the human
infection to have the infection. Therefore, given this  scenario,
called  COVID‐19. Since then, this virus has crossed Chinese bor‐
ders and caused a devastating pandemic,  of  knowledge  regarding
recommendations on care challenging health services and the soci‐
ety and leading provided to pregnant women dealing with the novel
to  high  levels of mortality that varies according to each coun‐
trys epidemiological and social characteristics(1‐4).   The  dis‐
semination  of  this  disease  led  the WHO to declare on January
30th, 2020 a Public Health Emergency of International Importance,
which  requires  actions to prevent its transmission and decrease
the occurrence the main concepts that ground a field of research.
of  new  infections. Recommendations include the early Because of
the emergency of this topic and the low detection of the disease,
social  isolation  for the entire availability of scientific evi‐
dence on the topic, the choice community, the reporting of cases,
and  to  investigate for this methodology is justified because it
contemplates and properly manage cases(5‐6).  all kinds of scien‐
tific  literature,  going beyond issues It is known that the main
routes of SARS‐COV‐2 concerning the effectiveness of an interven‐
tion  or transmission are droplets of secretions from the experi‐
ence with treatments or care. Five stages were respiratory  tract
of  symptomatic or asymptomatic followed in this study, as listed
by Arksey and OMalley, individuals who carry the virus, and  con‐
taminated  objects. There is evidence that this pathogen is iden‐
tification of relevant studies, selection of studies, transmitted
through feces(4). There has been much mapping of information, and
grouping, summary and report of results(12‐13).  that individuals
with  the SARS‐COV‐2 virus may be asymptomatic. When symptomatic,
people tend to production of knowledge regarding  recommendations
experience:  fever, running nose, nasal congestion, for providing
care to pregnant women dealing with  dyspnea,  malaise,  loss  of
taste, and even more the novel coronavirus?. The studies included
in this are most common, and even lethal, among elderly  strategy
PCC  (Population,  Concept, and Context), as individuals, immuno‐
suppressed individuals, women during pregnancy  and  post‐partum,
and  those  with women, the concept of interest was COVID‐19 pan‐
demic There is a gap in the knowledge concerning the implications
of  SARS‐COV‐2  during pregnancy.  Initially, the number of preg‐
nant women infected was and SARS‐CoV‐2 virus, and the context an‐
alyzed was proportionally smaller than the population in general,
performed in the databases appropriate  for  the  topic  however,
when  infected, these women became more under study: Medical Lit‐
erature Analysis and Retrieval vulnerable to the more severe man‐
ifestations of the Scopus, Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied
Health In this sense, in March 2020, the Brazilian Ministry  Lit‐
erature  (CINAHL),  Web of Science (WoS), and Latin of Health in‐
cluded pregnant women as a risk group American and Caribbean Cen‐
ter  on  Health  Sciences  for  COVID‐19  based  on physiological
changes  that  Information  (LILACS),  through  three   different
stages:  take  place during pregnancy, which tend to aggravate 1)
controlled descriptors appropriate for the  databases  infectious
conditions  due  to the low tolerance to hypoxia were used in the
first search (Medical Subject observed in this  population(6,11).
The  decision  to  include  Headings  ‐ MeSH, CINAHL Headings and
Health pregnant women as risk group took into account prior  Sci‐
ences  Descriptors ‐ DeCS); 2) in the second stage, knowledge re‐
garding other viruses and  even  respiratory  non‐controlled  de‐
scriptors  were  used  in  all databases Mascarenhas VHA, Caroci‐
Becker A, Venncio KCMP, Baraldi NG, Durkin AC, Riesco  MLG.   and
repositories  to broaden the search and use terms to include gray
literature due to the currency of the that were specific  to  the
current topic; 3) the third topic researched.  stage consisted of
identifying and selecting reference lists on  the  sources  used.
Note  that  it  was  not possible The search strategy used in the
different databases Search Strategy ((((Pregnant Women  OR  preg‐
nan*))) AND ((COVID‐19 OR severe acute respiratory syndrome coro‐
navirus 2 OR severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus  2  OR
2019‐nCoV OR SARS‐CoV‐2 OR 2019nCoV OR coronavirus))) AND ((Preg‐
nancy OR Gestation, Obstetric OR Maternal‐Fetal Relations))) Sco‐
pus and (TITLE‐ABS‐KEY ((Pregnant Women OR pregnant* OR Antenatal
Women)) AND TITLE‐ABS‐KEY ((COVID‐19 OR severe acute  respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 OR severe acute respiratory syndrome coro‐
navirus 2 OR 2019‐nCoV OR SARSCoV‐2 OR 2019nCoV OR coronavirus ))
AND TITLE‐ABS‐KEY ((pregnancy OR gestation OR Obstetric OR Mater‐
nal‐Fetal ((Expectant Mothers OR Pregnant Women OR Antenatal Wom‐
en  OR  Pregnan*))  AND ((Coronavirus OR COVID‐19 OR 2019‐nCoV OR
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 OR  severe  acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2))) AND ((pregnancy or pregnant
or prenatal or antenatal or maternal))  (tw:((Pregnant  Women  OR
Pregnan$)))  AND  (tw:((Coronavirus  Infections or Coronavirus OR
Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus OR  COVID‐19)))  AND
(tw:((Pregnancy  OR  Labor,  Obstetric))) Inclusion criteria were
studies with a wide range discussed in the form of  a  narrative,
based on the classification of conceptual categories.  The PRISMA
checklist was adopted to ensure the addressing the  novel  coron‐
avirus  that  causes COVID‐19 quality of this study as it ensures
the parts composing in the context of pregnancy and  outcomes  in
maternal‐  child  health. Papers that did not meet the studys ob‐
jectives or did not provide pertinent information  were  used  to
properly  store  and  organize  the  references  obtained  in the
search. It allows for more than one researcher  to  automatically
access  the references, which is an important resource during the
study selection Regarding the selection and inclusion of  papers,
(PRISMA‐ScR)  was  used, which is ideal to describe in detail the
decision process of research considering of 536 studies were  po‐
tentially eligible (MEDLINE/ search results and verified the rel‐
evance of the studies PubMed=188; Scopus=262; WoS=55;  CINAHL=29;
identified.  Disagreements  regarding the inclusion of LILACS=2).
Of these, 168 studies were excluded because they were duplicates,
as  detected  by Endnote Web. Thus, 368 studies were selected for
the stage studies was not assessed, as this aspect  is  not  were
eligible.  Thirteen  of  these were excluded either because their
full texts were not available or were data were collected using a
form  recommended  incongruent with this studys objectives. Thus,
the by JBI, which is intended to facilitate the synthesis of  in‐
formation  and  quality of recommendations of which were read and
analyzed by two researchers Data were collected using an  instru‐
ment  that  was  adapted  from this form to map information. This
Most of the papers were written by Chinese instrument  addresses:
publication  information  (year,  England (n=4), United States of
America (USA) (n=4), methodological characteristics (characteris‐
tics of the and Singapore (n=2).  study population); main results
(outcome measures and main findings  or  contributions);  context
(care  setting  and relevant cultural and social factors)(12,13).
not limited to those specifically from the fields of Rev. Latino‐
Am. Enfermagem 2020;28:e3348.  obstetrics and gynecology, but al‐
so included the fields three were case studies, and two were  ex‐
perience  immunology,  pathology,  radiology, and pediatrics. The
studies specific characteristics are presented in detail from the
results  obtained  from the studies analyzed: clinical manifesta‐
tions, diagnosis, treatment, working Regarding the papers method‐
ological  designs, pregnant women, vaccine development, pregnancy
there were empirical studies  (n=12)  and  theoretical  complica‐
tions,  prenatal care, vertical transmission, and studies (n=12).
Eight were retrospective descriptive make recommendations  objec‐
tive  and  facilitate  access  to  the main information.  Records
identified through database searching Additional records  identi‐
fied  through  other  sources Duplicates removed Records screened
for eligibility Records excluded with reasons Studies included in
qualitative  synthesis  Mascarenhas VHA, Caroci‐Becker A, Venncio
KCMP, Baraldi NG, Durkin AC, Riesco MLG.  Papers title Country of
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‐19) and pregnancy: what obstetri‐
cians need to know Coronavirus disease 2019  (COVID‐19)  pandemic
and  Clinical  manifestations and outcome of SARS‐CoV‐2 infection
during pregnancy A patient with SARS‐CoV‐2 infection during preg‐
nancy  in  Qingdao,  China  Clinical  features  and obstetric and
neonatal outcomes of pregnant patients with  COVID‐19  in  Wuhan,
China:  a  retrospective, single‐center, descriptive study Lancet
Infectious Diseases Expert consensus for managing pregnant  women
and  neonates  born  to mothers with suspected or confirmed novel
coronavirus (COVID‐19) infection Maternal health care  management
during the outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‐19) Clini‐
cal analysis of pregnant women with 2019 novel coronavirus  pneu‐
monia  Ultrasound in Obstetrics & Gynecology Experience of clini‐
cal management for pregnant women and newborns with novel  coron‐
avirus  pneumonia  in Tongji Hospital, China Current Medical Sci‐
ence Safe delivery for COVID‐19  infected  pregnancies  Pregnancy
and   perinatal   outcomes  of  women  with  coronavirus  disease
(COVID‐19) pneumonia: a preliminary Novel  corona  virus  disease
(COVID‐19) in pregnancy: what clinical recommendations to follow?
Acta Obstetrica et Gynecologica An analysis of 38 pregnant  women
with 2 COVID‐19, their newborn infants, and maternal‐fetal trans‐
mission of SARSCoV‐2: maternal coronavirus infections  and  preg‐
nancy Archives of Pathology & Laboratory COVID‐19: doctors in fi‐
nal trimester of pregnancy should avoid  direct  patient  contact
Impact  of  COVID‐19 infection on pregnancy outcomes and the risk
of maternal‐to‐neonatal intrapartum transmission of COVID‐19 dur‐
ing natural birth Infection Control & Hospital Epidemiology Clin‐
ical and CT imaging features of the COVID‐19 pneumonia: focus  on
pregnant  women  and  children Risks of novel coronavirus disease
(COVID‐19) in Archives of Academic Emergency Clinical  character‐
istics   and  intrauterine  vertical  transmission  potential  of
COVID‐19 infection in nine Novel coronavirus infection and  preg‐
nancy  Ultrasound  in  Obstetrics & Gynecology Potential maternal
and infant outcomes from (Wuhan) Coronavirus 2019‐nCoV  infecting
pregnant  women:  lessons from SARS, MERS, and other human coron‐
avirus Outcome of  coronavirus  spectrum  infections  (SARS,  and
meta‐analysis  Gynecology MFM From the frontline of COVID‐19: how
prepared are we as obstetricians: a commentary Why  are  pregnant
women susceptible to COVID‐19? An immunological viewpoint Norway,
Sweden, and China Italy, England, Russia, and USA China  and  USA
SP, Brazil, 2020 Rev. Latino‐Am. Enfermagem 2020;28:e3348.  CLIN‐
ICAL MANIFESTATIONS: the pregnant  womens  clinical  aspects  are
similar to those of the general population DIAGNOSIS (guide preg‐
nant women regarding the COVID‐19 signs and symptoms and make  an
initial  assessment through telephone) Signs and symptoms of res‐
piratory infection: ‐ Most frequent: fever, dry  cough,  loss  of
taste  and  ‐  Less  frequent:  diarrhea  episodes, fatigue, sore
throat, ‐ Rare: nasal congestion,  runny  nose,  and  hemoptysis.
Laboratory  and  imaging  exams: ‐ Polymerase chain reaction with
reverse transcriptase (RT PCR); ‐ Molecular panel of  respiratory
viruses;  ‐  Blood count; ‐ Blood culture; ‐ C‐reactive protein ‐
Liver function tests ‐ Imaging exams.  Recent mobility history: ‐
Frequently  ask  the  history of travels and mobility of pregnant
women (recommend isolation and investigation);  ‐  Isolation  may
lead  to  anxiety  and  depression, thus psychological support is
recommended.  TREATMENT: there is no official protocol to be fol‐
lowed  with  a  definitive  treatment for COVID‐19, however, care
converges to the following pillars: 1‐ Admit the  patient  to  an
isolation  2‐ Provide supportive care 3‐ Assess the results of 4‐
Closely monitor vital signs and hemodynamic stability 5‐  Monitor
obstetrical  Antiviral  therapy: use of retroviral agents, little
scientific evidence.  ‐ Remdesivir: acts on viral nucleotides in‐
hibiting  their  replication  and  has shown to be effective when
used in SARS‐COV‐2 in vitro; ‐  Lopinavir‐ritonavir:  viral  pro‐
tease  inhibitor  drug that has been chosen as a drug regimen be‐
cause it is relatively safe during  pregnancy;  ‐  Interferon‐al‐
pha‐2a:  inhibits  viral replication and stimulates the bodys im‐
mune response. Its use in early pregnancy can affect fetal growth
and ‐Chloroquine phosphate: antimalarial with antiviral activity,
which interrupts the reception of the virus by  cells  and  their
chain  of  transmission.  In pregnant women, a higher dose is re‐
quired, but systolic hypotension was identified as a side effect.
Contraindicated  for pregnant women: even though promising in the
treatment of COVID‐19 ‐ Ribavirin: antiviral with a teratogenici‐
ty  effect  that  induces embryonic lethality or craniofacial and
embryonic limb deformities; ‐ Baricitinib:  animal  studies  have
shown  potential embryotoxicity.  Antibiotic therapy: part of the
treatment plan of most individuals infected by SARS‐CoV‐2, due to
extensive  lung damage caused by the virus. When starting the an‐
tibiotic therapy is a controversial topic  as  opinions  diverge.
Corticosteroids:  have  been  contraindicated because by delaying
infection control, it worsens ones respiratory condition  and  is
associated with poor neonatal outcomes.  ‐ methylprednisolone: in
the short term for severe dyspnea and hypoxemia. Avoid  in  preg‐
nant women for additional assessments. Have been used only in the
postoperative of C‐sections; ‐ betamethasone: recommended in cas‐
es of premature births or when there is a need to resolve a preg‐
nancy in advance.  WORKING PREGNANT WOMEN ‐ More flexible working
opportunities; ‐ Decrease physical contact: telephones, videocon‐
ference, and administrative activities to avoid direct  interper‐
sonal contact; ‐ Pregnant women with gestational age greater than
28 weeks or with  risk  factors/underlying  comorbidities  should
consider  leaving the workplace and staying at home.  VACCINE DE‐
VELOPMENT: there are no vaccines  to  prevent  the  infection  by
SARS‐CoV‐2 ‐ The early use of intravenous immunoglobulin, includ‐
ing gamma globulin, has shown to be very  promising  in  reducing
severe  forms  of  the disease in COMPLICATIONS DURING PREGNANCY:
part of COVID‐19 cases during  pregnancy  developed  to  negative
outcomes  ‐  Spontaneous  abortion;  ‐  Premature rupture of mem‐
branes; ‐ Restricted intrauterine growth;  ‐  Fetal  distress;  ‐
Premature labor/birth PRENATAL CARE ‐ Recommend social isolation,
rest and sleep, nutrition and hydration; ‐ Provide individualized
care and emotional support; ‐ Provide a multidisciplinary team; ‐
Early diagnosis of pregnancy and COVID‐19; ‐ Recommend the use of
telemedicine  videoconference  platforms as well as technological
resources to clarify doubts and screen for  signs  and  ‐  Health
workers providing face‐to‐face consultations should pay attention
to fetal vitality, movement, and heart rate,  especially  in  the
third  trimester  of pregnancy with increased maternal anxiety; ‐
Heart rate monitoring and ultrasounds are essential for assessing
fetal  wellbeing; ‐ Health workers can assess some parameters re‐
motely such as measurement of uterine  height,  waist  circumfer‐
ence,  weight,  fetal  movement,  and  blood  pressure.  VERTICAL
TRANSMISSION ‐ There is no clinical or  serological  evidence  so
far  to  suggest that there is vertical transmission of the SARS‐
CoV‐2 virus; ‐ Research analyzing amniotic fluids samples, umbil‐
ical  cord  blood,  swabs from the neonatal pharynx and smears of
breast milk detected absence of viral isolates in  all  the  sam‐
ples,  suggesting the absence of intrauterine transmission of the
virus during the third trimester; ‐ Indication of vertical trans‐
mission: infant born via vagina from a woman diagnosed with pneu‐
monia by COVID‐19 tested positive (RT PCR) 35 hours after  birth;
‐  Attention  is  need  to all forms of potential transmission of
SARS‐CoV‐2 to newborns, among which: transmission  through  close
contact  and  droplets in the postpartum period (by the puerperal
woman and other family members) and hospital‐acquired infections.
TRANSPLACENTAL  TRANSMISSIBILITY ‐ Studies with placenta material
collected after birth  to  investigate  potential  transplacental
transmissibility  did not find teratogenicity, placental patholo‐
gies or inflammations, presence of the SARS‐CoV‐2 virus  of  thy‐
roid dysfunctional among newborns.  Paulo, Brazil, 2020 Mascaren‐
has VHA, Caroci‐Becker A, Venncio KCMP, Baraldi  NG,  Durkin  AC,
Riesco MLG.  risk of exposure to radiation. Note that none of the
radiological  exams  replaces  the  molecular   confirmation   of
COVID‐19(18).  body of knowledge concerning recommendations to As
for the treatment of positive pregnant women, the  care  provided
to  pregnant women dealing with there is not a consensual and of‐
ficial protocol so far.  the  novel  coronavirus.  The  Brazilian
Ministry  of  Health Hence, the medications and conducts are sub‐
ject classified pregnant women as a risk group  and  provided  to
cultural  and health care contexts, though the recommendations as
they tend to present poor outcomes main axes of care are based on
isolating pregnant when contaminated(8‐9,11).  women, classifying
them according to risks and needs The pandemic caused by the nov‐
el coronavirus determined by their clinical condition; recommend‐
ing remains very serious, highly contagious, and has proper sleep
and  rest;  promoting  appropriate  nutrition; affected the world
population beyond risk groups. Note providing supplementary  oxy‐
gen  support, if needed; the importance of sensitizing and making
individuals and monitoring the intake of fluids and electrolytes.
aware  of  its severity to reinforce preventive measures to Vital
signs and oxygen saturation levels should be decrease and control
this  infection(4,41‐42).  closely monitored, as well as the fre‐
quency of the Most of the studies were conducted in China because
fetus  heart  rate  to observe the progression of the it is where
the novel coronavirus originated. Additionally, pregnancy,  plan‐
ning individualized delivery, and having even though most studies
present few clinical cases, a multiprofessional team  to  provide
care(17‐18,22,29,36,39).  attention should be paid to these stud‐
ies as they report Amid this pandemic, it is  also  important  to
keep  in evidence that is currently available and it is extremely
mind that health workers should ensure women the  right  relevant
to identify the main clinical manifestations to humanized care to
be provided during pregnancy, dealing with  this  disease  during
pregnancy.  delivery, and puerperium, as well as to the child the
No differences were found between the clinical aspects  right  to
have  a  safe  birth,  and  healthy development and manifested by
pregnant women infected with COVID‐19 growth.  In  Brazil,  these
rights are ensured by the Rede and those of non‐pregnant individ‐
uals(17‐20,28,34‐36,38). The de Ateno  Sade  Materna  e  Infantil
[Maternal      and      main      symptoms     reported     were:
fever(18‐21,28‐29,32,34,36,39), Child Health Care Network]  known
as  Rede  Cegonha  dry  cough(18,20,28‐29,31‐32,34,36,38‐39), and
dyspnea(18‐19,21,29,32,36).  pregnancy reports  other  signs  and
symptoms,  which  The  studies  also highlight that this time re‐
quires even if at a lower frequency,  may  occur  and  should  be
pregnant  women have more flexible work opportunities, taken into
account to reach an early diagnosis(29).   being  able  to  leave
from work when gestational age is In terms of diagnosis, there is
a concern with greater than 28 weeks or when there are risk  fac‐
tors  or early detection of the disease. Thus, pregnant women un‐
derlying comorbidities(31,39‐40). These precautions are should be
recommended  to  learn about the specific needed considering that
being infected by COVID‐19 signs of COVID‐19 in order to decrease
their  exposure during pregnancy tends to result in negative out‐
comes, to health services. An initial assessment  performed  such
as  spontaneous  abortion,  premature  rupture  of membranes, re‐
stricted intrauterine growth, fetal distress,  to‐face  consulta‐
tion  is  necessary(17).  Note, however, that and premature labor
and birth(18‐19,24,27‐29,32,34,36,38‐40).  a retrospective  study
compared  the  clinical  aspects  Thus, in this context, prenatal
care is essential of pregnant and non‐pregnant women and verified
that  throughout the pregnancy, especially during the third symp‐
toms are atypical among pregnant women, which trimester when  the
final  stages  of development take would probably hinder the dis‐
eases early detection in place and maternal  anxiety  is  at  its
highest,  a  period this group.  that requires a larger number of
prenatal inspections.  symptoms, studies suggest: laboratory  ex‐
ams(6,36,29)  Comparative studies indicate that CT scans are more
sensitive than RT‐PCR, as well as  more  precise  and  time‐effi‐
cient,  presenting a lower number of falsenegatives. The clinical
findings of imaging exams of Therefore, monitoring heart rate and
ultrasound are essential to assess fetal wellbeing, and especial‐
ly among women infected  with  the  novel  coronavirus(18,23,26).
Note  that  so  far, there is no clinical or serological evidence
suggesting the possibility of vertical transmission of the  SARS‐
CoV‐2  virus(6,17‐19,25,27‐28,30,32,34,38‐40)  in  amniotic fluid
pregnant  women  are  similar  to  those  of  non‐pregnant   sam‐
ples(17‐18,25,30,34),                umbilical               cord
blood(17‐18,25,30,32,34,38‐40),  patients(28‐29,33,35).   Despite
its     various     advantages,     the     newborn    pharyngeal
swabs(17‐18,25,30,32,34,39), or milk breast  routine  use  of  CT
scans  should be avoided due to the smears(18,25,30,32,34‐35,39).
An absence of  isolated  viral  was  Rev.  Latino‐Am.  Enfermagem
2020;28:e3348.   verified in all the samples, suggesting there is
no intra‐ scientific evidence concerning obstetrical care provid‐
ed  uterine transmission of the virus during the third trimes‐ in
the context of the COVID‐19.  ter. All the studies, however,  are
retrospective  studies  addressing small samples, characteristics
that decrease the power of generalization. Studies using  placen‐
tas  1.  Secretaria  de  Estado  da Sade (BR). Coordenadoria also
identified no teratogenicity, placental pathologies or  de  Cont‐
role  de Doenas. Plano de Contingncia do inflammations, the pres‐
ence of the SARS‐CoV‐2 virus, Estado de So Paulo para Infeco  Hu‐
mana    pelo    novo    or    thyroid    dysfunction    in   new‐
borns(18,25,29,34,36‐37).  that the recent beginning of the  pan‐
demic and intense recommendations. As most studies are retrospec‐
tive studies and opinion papers, there is the risk of biased  in‐
formation.  Additionally,  the option to restrict studies written
in one of three languages also limited the number of studies,  as
potentially  eligible  papers originated in China were written in
the native language.  2. Sociedade Brasileira de Pediatria  (BR).
Recomendaes  sobre  os  respiratrios do recm‐nascido com COVID‐19
suspeita ou confirmada. [Internet]. 2020 [Acesso Coronavrus  2019
nCOV. [Internet]. 2020 [Acesso 15 3. Ministrio da Sade (BR). Sec‐
retaria de Ateno particularities, especially linked to physiolog‐
ical and Primria  Sade. Nota Tecnica n 10/2020‐COCAM/ immunologi‐
cal changes. Additionally, the need to protect a fetus represents
greater  responsibility  when providing Recem‐nascido no contexto
da Infeco pelo novo Coronavirus  (SARS‐CoV‐2).  [Internet].  2020
[Acesso  regarding the care provided to pregnant women during the
COVID‐19 pandemic. There is much uncertainty regarding the virus‐
specific  characteristics,  however, the following is recommended
to promote quality care 4. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gy‐
naecologists  to the maternal‐fetal pair: contain as much as pos‐
sible (UK). The Royal College of Midwifes.  Coronavirus  the  ad‐
vancement  of the virus with isolation and contact (COVID‐19) In‐
fection in Pregnancy. Information for precautions; care for  res‐
piratory infections; assess healthcare professionals. [Internet].
2020 [cited Apr risks and benefits constantly; confirm  the  dis‐
ease  and  pregnancy  the earliest as possible; use technological
resources for screening; provide oxygen support if needed; recom‐
mend  proper rest, sleep, nutrition, 5. Word Health Organization.
Novel Coronavirus (2019‐ nCoV). [Internet]. 2020  [cited  Apr  7,
2020]. Available and contraindicated medications that may present
teratogenic or toxic effects to the fetus; monitor  vital  signs;
provide  individualized  obstetrical  care with a 6. World Health
Organization. Essential nutrition actions: multiprofessional  ap‐
proach.   improving maternal, newborn, infant and young child The
information presented is not absolute and may health  and  nutri‐
tion.  [Internet].  Geneva:  WHO; 2013 change when new scientific
discoveries are reported.  future studies to investigate the  im‐
pact  of  the infection at the beginning of pregnancy (during the
first and 7. Ministrio da Sade (BR). Secretaria de Cincia, second
trimesters),  the  psychological  aspects of infected Tecnologia,
Inovao e Insumos Estratgicos em Sade.  pregnant women, and analy‐
ses  of  medications specific Diretrizes para Diagnstico e Trata‐
mento da Covid‐19.  for pregnancy. The gaps that remain  are  ex‐
pected  to  [Internet].  2020 [Acesso 20 abr 2020]. Disponvel em:
motivate the development of  further  research  with  Mascarenhas
VHA, Caroci‐Becker A, Venncio KCMP, Baraldi NG, Durkin AC, Riesco
MLG.  8. Rodriguez‐Morales AJ, Cardona‐Ospina JA,  Gutirrez‐  Gy‐
necol.  2020 Mar 23. pii: S0002‐9378(20)30343‐4.  19. Liu Y, Chen
H, Tang K, Guo Y. Clinical manifestations and Imaging Features of
COVID‐19: A systematic and outcome of SARS‐CoV‐2 infection during
pregnancy.     J.    Infect.    Dis.    2020    Mar    4.    pii:
S0163‐4453(20)30109‐2.   20.  Wen  R,  Sun Y, Xing Q‐S. A patient
with SARS‐ 9. Ministrio da Sade (BR). Secretaria de  Ateno  CoV‐2
infection  during  pregnancy  in  Qingdao, China.  Primria  Sade.
Protocolo de manejo clnico do J Microbiol  Immunol  Infect.  2020
Mar  10.  pii:  S1684‐  coronavrus  (COVID‐ 19) na atenco primria
sade.  [Internet]. 2020 [Acesso 20 abr 2020]. Disponvel 21. Yu N,
Li  W,  Kang Q, Xiong Z, Wang S, Lin X, et al.  Clinical features
and obstetric and neonatal outcomes  of  pregnant  patients  with
COVID‐19 in Wuhan, China: 10. Chen H, Guo J, Wang C, Luo F, Yu X,
Zhang vertical transmission potential of COVID‐19  infection  11.
Dong Y, Mo X, Hu Y, Qi X, Jiang F, Jiang Z, et al.  Epidemiologi‐
cal characteristics of 2143 pediatric patients with  2019  coron‐
avirus disease in China. Pediatrics.  12. Peters MDJ, Godfrey CM,
Khalil H, McInerney P, Parker D, Soares CB. Guidance for conduct‐
ing  systematic scoping 13. Arksey H, OMalley L. Scoping studies:
towards a methodological framework. Int J Soc Res Methodol.   15.
Tricco  AC, Lillie E, Zarin W, OBrien KK, Colquhoun (PRISMA‐ScR):
Checklist and Explanation. Ann Intern 22. Chen D, Yang H, Cao  Y,
Cheng  W,  Duan  T,  Fan  C, et al. Expert consensus for managing
pregnant women and neonates born to  mothers  with  suspected  or
confirmed  novel coronavirus (COVID‐19) infection. Int J Gynaecol
23. Chen Y, Li Z, Zhang Y‐Y, Zhao W‐H, Yu Z‐Y.  Maternal  manage‐
ment  during  coronavirus  disease  2019 (COVID‐19). J Med Virol.
2020 24. Chen S, Liao E, Shao Y. Clinical  analysis  of  pregnant
women with 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia. J Med 25. Mullins E,
Evans D, Viner RM, OBrien P, Morris  E.   Ultrasound  Obstet  Gy‐
necol.  2020  May;55(5):586‐592.   26. Wang S‐S, Zhou X, Lin X‐G,
Liu Y‐Y, Wu J‐L, Sharifu LM, et al. Experience of  Clinical  Man‐
agement  for  Pregnant  Women and Newborns with Novel Coronavirus
Pneumonia in Tongji Hospital, China. Curr Med Sci. 2020 27. Qi H,
Luo  X,  Zheng Y, Zhang H, Li J, Zou L, et al.  Safe Delivery for
COVID‐19 Infected Pregnancies. BJOG.  16. Moher  D,  Liberati  A,
Tetzlaff  J,  Altman  DG,  PRISMA 28. Liu D, Li L, Wu X, Zheng D,
Wang J, Yang L, et al. Pregnancy and Perinatal Outcomes of  Women
With  Coronavirus  Disease  (COVID‐19)  Pneumonia:  A Preliminary
Analysis. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2020 17. Rasmussen SA, Smulian JC,
Lednicky  JA,  Wen  TS,  Jamieson  DJ.  Coronavirus  Disease 2019
(COVID‐19) and Pregnancy: What obstetricians need to know.   rec‐
ommendations to follow? Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand.  18. Dashraath
P, Jing Lin Jeslyn W, Mei Xian Karen L, 30. Schwartz DA. An anal‐
ysis  of  38  pregnant  women Li Min L, Sarah L, Biswas A, et al.
Coronavirus Disease with COVID‐19, their newborn infants, and ma‐
ternal‐ 2019 (COVID‐19) Pandemic and Pregnancy. Am J Obstet fetal
transmission of SARS‐CoV‐2: maternal coronavirus Rev.  Latino‐Am.
Enfermagem  2020;28:e3348.   infections  and  pregnancy outcomes.
Arch Pathol. Lab obstetricians: a commentary. BJOG‐AN Int  J  Ob‐
stet  31.  Rimmer  A. Covid‐19: doctors in final trimester of 40.
Liu H, Wang L‐L, Zhao S‐J, Kwak‐Kim J, Mor  G,  pregnancy  should
avoid  direct  patient  contact. BMJ.  Liao A‐H. Why are pregnant
women susceptible to COVID‐19? An immunological viewpoint. J  Re‐
prod 32. Suliman K, Liangyu P, Rabeea S, Ghulam N, Nawsherwan MX,
Jianbo Liu GH. Impact of COVID‐19 41. Direo Geral de  Sade  (PT).
Norma n 007/2020, infection on pregnancy outcomes and the risk of
de 29 de maro de 2020. Preveno e Controle  de  Infeco  por  SARS‐
CoV‐2 (COVID‐19): Equipamentos COVID‐19 during natural birth. In‐
fect Control Hosp 33. Liu H, Liu F, Li J, Zhang T, Wang D, Lan W.
Clinical  and  CT Imaging Features of the COVID‐19 Pneumonia: 42.
Vilelas JMS. O novo coronavrus e o risco para a Focus on Pregnant
Women  and Children. J Infect.  sade das crianas. Rev. Latino‐Am.
Enfermagem.  34. Panahi L, Amiri M, Pouy S. Risks of Novel Coron‐
avirus 43. Brasil. Ministrio da Sade. Secretaria de Ateno [Inter‐
net]. Arch Acad Emerg Med. 2020 [cited Apr 20, Estratgicas.  Por‐
taria n 1.459, de 24 de junho de 2011. Institui, no mbito do Sis‐
tema nico de Sade ‐ SUS ‐ a  Rede  Cegonha  [Internet].  Braslia:
Ministrio  35. Chen H, Guo J, Wang C, Luo F, Yu X, Zhang da Sade;
2011 [Acesso 21 abr 2020]. Disponvel  em:  vertical  transmission
potential of COVID‐19 infection 36. Yang H, Wang C, Poon LC. Nov‐
el coronavirus infection and  pregnancy.  Ultrasound  Obstet  Gy‐
necol.  37. Schwartz DA, Graham AL. Potential Maternal and Infant
Outcomes from (Wuhan) Coronavirus  2019‐nCoV  Infecting  Pregnant
Women:  Lessons  from SARS, MERS, and Other Human Coronavirus In‐
fections. Viruses.  38. Di Mascio D, Khalil A, Saccone  G,  Rizzo
G, Buca D, Liberati M, et al. Outcome of Coronavirus spectrum in‐
fections (SARS, MERS, COVID 1 ‐19)  during  pregnancy:  39.  Chua
MSQ,  Lee  JCS,  Sulaiman  S,  Tan  HK.  From  the  frontline  of
COVID‐19‐How prepared are we as Maria Lcia  Zanetti  Victor  Hugo
Alves Mascarenhas Copyright  2020 Revista Latino‐Americana de En‐
fermagem offered. Recommended for maximum dissemination  and  use
of

