Rev. Latino‐Am. Enfermagem Effect of income on the cumulative in‐
cidence of COVID‐19: an ecological study* Ricardo de Mattos Russo
Rafael1,2  Mercedes Neto1 Davi Gomes Depret1 Adriana Costa Gil1,3
income and the cumulative incidence of COVID‐19 in the  neighbor‐
hoods  of  the  city  of Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil. Method: Mary
Hellem Silva Fonseca1,3 Reinaldo Souza‐Santos Objective: to  ana‐
lyze  the relationship between per capita an ecological study us‐
ing neighborhoods as units of analysis.  The cumulative incidence
rate  per  100,000  inhabitants  and the median of potential con‐
founding variables (sex, race, and age) were calculated. Multiple
analysis  included quantile regression, estimating the regression
coefficients of the variable income for  every  five  percentiles
from  the 10th to 90th percentiles to verify the relationship be‐
tween income and incidence. Results: the citys rate was 36.58 new
cases per 100,000 inhabitants. In general, the highest rates were
observed in the wealthiest regions. Multiple analysis was consis‐
tent  with  this  observation  since the per capita income Health
Context.  Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Faculdade  de
an  increase  of  R$  0.02 in the neighborhoods per capita income
Scholarship holder at the Universidade do Estado do Rio for every
unit  of  incidence.  Conclusion:  cumulative  incident  Coletiva
(CEPESC), Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.  Scholarship holder at  the
Coordenao  de Aperfeioamento de Pessoal de Nvel Superior (CAPES),
Brazil.  coefficient of 0.02 (p‐value <0.001; R2 32.93). That is,
there  is  Enfermagem,  Rio  de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.  de Janeiro,
Centro de Estudos e Pesquisas em Sade  affected  all  percentiles
analyzed,  with  a median regression rates of COVID‐19 are influ‐
enced by ones neighborhood of residency, suggesting  that  access
to  testing  is  uneven.  Fundao Oswaldo Cruz, Escola Nacional de
Sade Pblica Sergio Arouca, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.   Descrip‐
tors:  Coronavirus;  Pandemics; Uses of Epidemiology; Income; So‐
cioeconomic Factors; Incidence Rafael RMR, Neto M, Depret DG, Gil
AC,  Fonseca MHS, Souza‐Santos R. Effect of income on the cumula‐
tive incidence of COVID‐19: an ecological study. Rev.  Latino‐Am.
Enfermagem.  2020;28:e3344.  [Access ___ __ ____]; month day Rev.
Latino‐Am. Enfermagem 2020;28:e3344.  newspaper presents a report
on the possibility of With the declaration of the new Coronavirus
more significant contagion  and  lethality  among  Afro‐  disease
(COVID‐19)  pandemic  by  the  World  Health descendent individu‐
als(13). If we consider that the Organization on March 11 , 2020,
the  escalation  of relationship of income distribution in Brazil
is affected studies addressing potential strategies to cope  with
by  race,  investigations are needed to address these the disease
has reached a new level(1‐2). A COVID‐19 variables in explanatory
models.   vaccine, which is the primary means to decrease the Fi‐
nally, similar to other respiratory infections, populations  sus‐
ceptibility, and consequently the best advanced age (the elderly)
has been appointed as the way to flatten epidemic curves, is  in‐
existent up to variable leading to the most severe manifestations
of now. Thus, only measures to intervene in the social  the  dis‐
ease in most papers investigating the COVID‐19 structure as a way
to reduce the speed at which pandemic(14‐15). In this  sense,  it
seems  essential to COVID‐19 spreads remain .  control models in‐
tended to investigate the relationship The need to  identify  the
more vulnerable groups between income and COVID‐19 for sex, race,
and age, and the diseases behavior has gained  space  in  the  to
perform  a  more  complex explanatory analysis, an aspect that is
lacking in the knowledge acquired so far.   treatment,  and  con‐
tainment mechanisms have guided though regarding the diseases so‐
cial dynamics in developing countries and more  impoverished  re‐
gions.   The reason is that accumulated theoretical knowledge re‐
garding infectious diseases indicates that there is  a  potential
relationship  between  per capita income and the incidence of the
disease; its spread dynamics are different in European and  North
American regions, where a significant portion of studies address‐
ing Therefore, this study presents an  alternative  are  directly
linked  to  the per capita income of neighborhoods, regardless of
the remaining predictors Therefore, this studys objective is:  to
analyze the relationship between per capita income and cumulative
incidence of the COVID‐19 in the neighborhoods in the city of Rio
de  Janeiro,  RJ, Brazil.  tuberculosis, and leprosy have already
reported this This is an ecological study, the units of  analysis
relationship so that it remains to be known how of which were 159
neighborhoods in the city of Rio de this variable behaves in  the
case  of the COVID‐19 Janeiro, located in the metropolitan region
of Rio de pandemic, a critical gap so far(7‐9).  Janeiro. The op‐
tion  to investigate at a neighborhood Based on the international
debate on the topic, level, especially in  the  city  of  Rio  de
Janeiro, is because this study postulates three other factors re‐
lated of the possibility to understand social nuances and to  in‐
come,  mainly  due  to their possible role as inequalities, which
may ultimately behave similarly to confounding variables in  ana‐
lytical  models.  The  first  other Brazilian regions.  postulate
found in the Brazilian literature  is  that  The  databases  made
available  by  the  Pereira per capita income is related to race.
Economic and social inequalities produce harmful effects on  ill‐
ness  of  Rio  de Janeiro were used. The variables concerning and
access to health services(10). To  some  extent,  the  population
structure were collected through the this relationship can be re‐
produced in the COVID‐19 Data Rio application of the  IPP,  using
data  from the context, so that these effects need to be investi‐
gated 2010 Census provided by the Instituto Brasileiro in analyt‐
ical  models.  There  is abundant literature reporting that women
more frequently access health Geography and Statistics)(16). They
are:  population,  services,  either because of the way they con‐
ceive the distribution of the population according  to  sex,  age
health‐disease construct and understand their self‐ distribution,
self‐reported race, and per capita income.  assessment of health,
or  because of the  already The neighborhood was the unit of ini‐
tial observation.  agreed upon ‐ harmful effects  of  the  tradi‐
tional  view  of  gender  on  the male population(11‐12). In this
sense, the Administrative Regions.  distribution of  sex  in  the
composition  of  the  population may somehow affect the epidemics
behavior.  The databases of the government of the state of Rio de
Janeiro  that  were available to the public were used Bringing up
this debate in which race and in  data  collection,  specifically
through  the  Coronavrus  socioeconomic  class are intimately in‐
volved in the COVID‐19(17) application. The  variables  collected
in Rafael RMR, Neto M, Depret DG, Gil AC, Fonseca MHS, Souza‐San‐
tos R.  this application were: sex, age, date of report, city  of
and  Per capita Income presented a Z statistic of 8.63 residence,
neighborhood, and test result. Two aspects and 828, respectively.
In  both cases, the p‐value was need to be clarified: 1) the unit
of observation used by the state government system is  the  indi‐
vidual;  2)  performed  visual  tests of distribution, confirming
that the report of the number of cases, which is updated the dis‐
tribution  of  data  was  not  normal.  Therefore, daily, is only
available after laboratory confirmation of positive testing   in‐
formation  regarding  suspected considered the characteristics of
this distribution.  cases discarded upon laboratory exam  is  not
disclosed.  Data were collected from April 7th to 13th 2020.  the
univariate analyses consisted of calculating the Considering  the
speed at which data are produced median values of the percentages
of women, of those due to the progression phase of  the  COVID‐19
60  years  or older, and afro‐descendent individuals, epidemic in
Brazil, it is important to note that data and per  capita  income
in Reais (R$) aggregated concerning the disease occurred on April
13th, totaling 2,323 observations. Of these,  11  were  excluded:
established  by  the city of Rio de Janeiro nine because they re‐
ferred to another city, and two A  bivariate  analysis  was  per‐
formed to measure were imported cases (allochthonous). This data‐
base the association between the exposure  variable  of  contains
community  transmissions from April 5th interest and outcome, us‐
ing Spearmans correlation to 13 , 2020.  After  data  collection,
variables were because the distribution was not normal. This test
considered the null hypothesis that two variables are region,  to
facilitate  the presentation of results.  independent, considered
to be statistically significant at 5% (type 1 error).  Cumulative
Incidence  Rate,  is obtained by dividing The effect of the expo‐
sure variable on the the cumulative  number  of  confirmed  cases
since outcome was estimated using a multiple quantile the popula‐
tion in the neighborhood started being regression analysis, using
the  neighborhood  as the observed, using 100,000 as the basis of
the indicator.  unit of analysis(19). This regression  model  was
chosen  Thus,  the results of this variable were expressed in be‐
cause the distribution was not normal; the outcome new cases  per
100,000  inhabitants.  The  exposure  variable  was skewed to the
left; and there was high variable of interest, per capita income,
was  collected heteroscedasticity in the relationship between the
and used in the analysis in its original format.  outcome and ex‐
posure  of interest variables, observed Independent control vari‐
ables were considered by the Breusch‐Pagan &  Cook‐Weisberg  test
(X2  according  to  the theoretical model presented in 857.89; p‐
valor: <0.001). This effect makes certain the  introduction:  the
percentage of women in the percentiles be influenced by the model
predictors, population, the  proportion  of  elderly  individuals
above  while  linear regression models based on the least the age
of 60, and the percentage of afro‐descendent squares  method  are
not appropriate. In this sense, and mixed‐race individuals. These
variables were although not very widespread in the health  field,
constructed  by dividing the numerator, where the interest infor‐
mation was placed (e.g., the number already traditional method in
econometric  models,  is  a  of  women  in the population) by the
neighborhoods methodological  option.   population.  The  results
were  multiplied  by 100.  The regression coefficients were esti‐
mated in this The building, cleansing, and statistical processing
multiple analysis for every five percentiles from the 10th of the
databases were performed using Stata SE 15 to  90th  percentiles,
using  the per capita income variable (StataCorp LP, College Sta‐
tion, United States). First, as  the  exposure  of  interest  and
forcing  the  entry of univariate analysis was performed to apply
descriptive the remaining independent variables, always from  the
analyses,  and  then bivariate analysis and multiple same regres‐
sion model and according to this studys quantile regression  were
performed  to  identify the theoretical model. The standard error
was calculated dependence and effect of the per capita income and
using  the bootstrap replication technique with 20 COVID‐19 inci‐
dence rate.  repetitions. Standard error was calculated using the
Because  the  outcome  and exposure variables are bootstrap tech‐
nique with 20 repetitions. Taking  as  two  continuous  numerical
variables,  the  Shapiro‐Wilk  reference the null hypothesis that
the effect of the test was used to test whether the  distribution
was  exposure  variable is equal in all the percentiles, the nor‐
mal. The test considered the null hypothesis that Wald  test  was
calculated  using  a  reference error of 5%.  the distribution is
normal and close to a Gaussian curve.  Finally, considering  this
study  presents secondary The Shapiro‐Wilk test for the variables
Incidence Rate data analysis and uses databases widely accessible
Rev. Latino‐Am. Enfermagem 2020;28:e3344.  in public sites, ethi‐
cal recommendations for studies old or older, of  Afro‐descendent
individuals,  and per addressing human subjects do not apply, and
this study capita income (R$). Attention is  drawn  to  the  fact
that  is  exempted  from the opinion of a Research Ethics Copaca‐
bana, Tijuca, and Botafogo rank first in terms of median percent‐
ages  of  women  and  individuals aged 60 years old or older, and
rank last in terms of the median  percentage  of  Afro‐descendent
individuals. At the opposite end is Complexo do Alemo, presenting
neighborhoods in the city of Rio de Janeiro, aggregated the  low‐
est  per  capita income in the city and the lowest by administra‐
tive regions, according to the variables: percentage of women and
elderly  individuals.  The  number of neighborhoods in the region
and the median region also presents one of the  largest  Afro‐de‐
scendent  percentage of women, of individuals aged 60 years popu‐
lations in the city, second only to Cidade de Deus.  according to
the  variables: number of neighborhoods in the region and the me‐
dian percentages of women, of individuals 60 years old or  older,
of  Afro‐descendent  individuals, and per capita income (R$). Rio
de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil, 2020 Number of
 60 year‐ old Per capita Barra da Tijuca Campo Grande  Cidade  de
Deus  Comp.  do  Alemo Ilha do Governador Rio Comprido Santa Cruz
Santa Teresa So Cristvo Vigrio Geral Vila  Isabel  Administrative
region  *Minimum wage R$ 510.00, Brazil, 2010 Rafael RMR, Neto M,
Depret DG, Gil AC, Fonseca MHS, Souza‐Santos R.  The COVID‐19 Cu‐
mulative Incidence Rate in the Rejecting the null hypothesis that
the two variables city was 36.58 new cases  per  100,000  inhabi‐
tants, are independent, Spearmans test resulted in Rho 0.524; to‐
taling 2,312 new cases confirmed in the  period.  Of  these,  599
cases  did  not provide information regarding regression results.
Note that per capita income presented the neighborhood  of  resi‐
dence  (34.74%)  while  146 an effect in all the strata analyzes.
The  coefficient of (11.83%) did not provide information on  age,
and  the  per  capita income variable also increases according to
the percentile, indicating this variable presents by  administra‐
tive  region  in the general population, higher explanatory power
in the model. Note that the according to women, men,  individuals
aged  60  years  adjusted R2 increases as a function of the Inci‐
dence old or older, and the  non‐elderly  population  (<60  years
Rate percentile, while the number of predictors with a old). Note
that the Lagoa region leads with the highest  statistically  sig‐
nificant  effect, decreases.  incidence in all the variables ana‐
lyzed, followed by Tijuca and  Copacabana.  Ilha  de  Paquet  and
Jacarezinho,  per  capita  income variable, according to the per‐
centile on the other hand, did not present cases so far. Mar ana‐
lyzed.  Note  the  accentuated effect of the variable in and Com‐
plexo do Alemo present 1.08 and 1.45 new the last percentile. Re‐
jecting  the  null  hypothesis that the cases per 100,000 inhabi‐
tants, respectively. Specifically,  adjusted  per  capita  income
variable  is  the  same  in all the concerning the incidence rate
among 60‐year‐old or percentiles  tested,  the  F  statistic  was
equal to 4.18, with older individuals, Rocinha presents the high‐
est result.  a p‐value equal to 0.003.  Janeiro. RJ. Brazil. 2020
Barra da Tijuca Campo Grande Cidade de Deus Administrative Region
Complexo do Alemo Ilha de Paquet Ilha do Governador Rio  Comprido
Santa  Cruz Santa Teresa So Cristvo Vigrio Geral Vila Isabel Rev.
Latino‐Am. Enfermagem 2020;28:e3344.  percentages of  individuals
aged 60 years old or older, Afro‐descendent individuals, and wom‐
en in the neighborhoods in  the  city  of  Rio  de  Janeiro,  RJ,
Brazil, 2020 Adjusted R2 % Afro‐descendent individuals Per capita
income % 60‐year‐old or older individuals  Per  capita  income  %
Afro‐descendent individuals % Afro‐descendent individuals % Afro‐
descendent individuals % 60‐year‐old  or  older  individuals  Per
capita  income  % 60‐year‐old or older individuals Per capita in‐
come % 60‐year‐old or  older  individuals  Per  capita  income  %
60‐year‐old  or  older  individuals % Afro‐descendent individuals
Per capita income *Regression  coefficient;  Confidence  Interval
95%;  Lower  limit;  Upper limit; ||T statistics; Minimum wage R$
510.00, Brazil, 2010 incidence rate adjusted for the  percentages
of  individuals  aged  60 years old or older, Afro‐descendent and
women in the neighborhoods of the city of  Rio  de  Janeiro,  RJ,
Brazil,  2020 Rafael RMR, Neto M, Depret DG, Gil AC, Fonseca MHS,
Souza‐Santos R.   explanations:  1)  that  the  social  isolation
adopted in the wealthiest neighborhoods may positively affect the
Relating income with the incidence of infectious spread chain  in
the more impoverished neighborhoods; diseases is not new, as this
relationship has been and 2) that underreporting rates are higher
in  poorer diseases(7‐9,20). Since the beginning of the pandemic,
In addition to these explanations, it is important to  note  that
the media widely reported that the first the behavior of the epi‐
demic in the worlds most cases imported into the city were  among
residents impoverished regions(6,21‐22). Considering knowledge of
from the South of the city and Barra da Tijuca, who the epidemio‐
logical chain of other infectious diseases, had recently returned
from Europe. Hence, the virus many  situations  may  determine  a
different behavior started spreading mainly in these areas, which
does of COVID‐19 in these places. These  situations  include  not
exclude  the remaining hypotheses under analysis.  greater spread
due to the high population and The Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, moni‐
toring  the household density, interaction with other chronic and
COVID‐19 and using Big Data from Instituto de infectious diseases
coupled  with the health systems Comunicao e Informao Cientfica e
Tecnolgica diminished capacity to provide treatment, and  greater
lethality  due  to the decreased capacity of intensive Communica‐
tion and Information in Health], launched  care  units(23).   the
MonitoraCovid‐19.  The system monitors variables This studys main
finding indicates that per capita concerning the movement of peo‐
ple,  using  it as a proxy income has a significant effect on the
cumulative in the assessment of social isolation. The systems in‐
cidence  rate  of COVID‐19, progressively increasing results show
decreased use of public transportation in the  city  compared  to
the  period  before  the pandemic, percentiles. Note that, in the
groups with the lowest especially when the first  legal  measures
were  adopted incidence, each incidence unit is related to an in‐
crease to prevent the spread of the disease(25). On the other  of
R$ 0.01 in income, while this increase is of R$0.03 hand, the re‐
sults also show certain instability in in the 75 percentiles.  In
this  sense, more the flow of people over the days, especially on
the affluent neighborhoods tend to present  higher  rates,  week‐
ends.  It  is  not, however, possible to state that regardless of
the percentage of elderly individuals, groups do not  intercommu‐
nicate,  especially  between Afro‐descendants, and women.  neigh‐
borhoods in a time when people  are  experiencing  From  what  is
known  about the social structures in the city of Rio de Janeiro,
considering a higher Considering  that  the  largest  populations
with  the  worst  access to services are concentrated in the most
impoverished neighborhoods, the natural  hypothesis  is  impover‐
ished regions, we conclude that the disease is that these regions
would experience a greater spread spreading more rapidly  in  the
regions  with the lowest of the disease, as it occurs in the epi‐
demiological chain per capita income, even though it was initiat‐
ed  in  of  other respiratory diseases the areas with the highest
per capita income(27). For practical  effect  of  these  findings
gains  strength  in the these reasons, it seems unlikely that the
relationship observation that  the  wealthiest  regions  such  as
Lagoa, between income and incidence is a reflex of the social Ti‐
juca and Copacabana, present high cumulative isolation adopted in
the  citys  wealthiest regions. On incidence rates, occupying the
first of the five ranks the contrary, the explanation likely lies
in  the  second  of per capita income. On the other hand, Mar and
hypothesis raised in the UFRRJ report, that is, high Complexo  do
Alemo,  which  rank  last in terms of underreporting rates in the
poorest regions are the income, also present the lowest incidence
rates  of the origin of this phenomenon.  the increasing precari‐
ousness of the workforce(26).  This paradox was  recently  raised
in  a technical The key to solving this theoretical imbroglio may
be linked to three interrelated aspects: classification,  of  Rio
de  Janeiro  (UFRRJ) regarding the COVID‐19 sociospatial dynamics
in the program  areas  of  Rio  de  Janeiro  and  Baixada  Flumi‐
nense(24). The results suspected and probable cases in the calcu‐
lation of reported by this  document  indicate  a  higher  number
databases,  recommending social isolation without of cases in re‐
gions with the highest economic power, contradicting the  distri‐
bution typically observed in recommended in various official doc‐
uments that mild Brazilian states. The document presents two  po‐
tential  and asymptomatic cases remain at home in isolation, Rev.
Latino‐Am. Enfermagem 2020;28:e3344.  without, however, requiring
screening  testing. The of drug‐resistant tuberculosis. The worst
results of important selection bias expressed in  the  option  of
this  form  of the disease were associated with a more presenting
indicators based only on confirmed cases abundant supply of  cul‐
ture  tests and better economic indicates a considerable and fal‐
lacious decrease in the indicators, among which  income(7).  Spa‐
tial  analysis  incidence of the disease, preventing the planning
of of the relationship between HIV infection and social more  ef‐
fective  public  policies  .  determinants presented results that
are consistent with this studys findings, where the  highest  in‐
fection underreporting of the disease. A mathematical model rates
are present in places with improved living produced by the  Impe‐
rial  College  London  indicates conditions, reinforcing the idea
that unequal access to a mean detection rate well below the actu‐
al  context  screening  tests of infectious diseases directly af‐
fects of the pandemic(28). The number of cases in Brazil the  re‐
port  of  diseases(8).  is estimated to be 12 to 15 times greater
than that reported by the Ministry of Health(29‐30).   Therefore,
it  is expected that approximately 5% of the infected people will
need intensive care, One study based on the Chinese experience in
2.3%  will require mechanical ventilation, while Brazil Wuhan es‐
timates that 86% of the infectious cases presents problems in the
number  and  distribution were not documented before the countrys
health of intensive care beds. Thus, it is urgent to  expand  in‐
fectious cases were the source of contamination regional inequal‐
ities in Brazilian cities of approximately 80% of new  cases(31).
Even though mentioning that even in China, where the health there
is no consensus regarding this matter, a system was minimally or‐
ganized  to  receive COVID‐19 patients, the influence of dispari‐
ties in the access to continue to spread 8 days after  the  symp‐
toms cease, health services was observed(35). After all, capital‐
highlighting the need to  record  suspected  and  probable  based
necropolitics  seem  to  be disseminated to the point of reaching
poverty and the lives of poor people documentation of  cases  di‐
rectly affects the adoption of preventive measures and other san‐
itary barriers to contain the epidemic, which  directly  contrib‐
utes  to  important  to  interpret  these results considering its
worsening the epidemic.  limitations. The low  quality  of  data,
verified by the A lack of public information regarding the number
significant  percentage  of  cases  without  identifying  the  of
COVID‐19  tests  and  how  they are distributed among individuals
housing neighborhood, and the partiality states and in the  inte‐
rior  of  each city is also another of the cases tested, can pro‐
duce uncertainty in the problem to be faced in the context of the
pandemic  in  calculation  of  incidences. The format used by the
Brazil. It is known that Brazil is among the countries  Brazilian
Ministry  of Health and the government that least perform screen‐
ing testing, which decreases of Rio de Janeiro to  disclose  data
is  another  aspect  its ability to map cases based on suspected,
probable, that hinders more in‐depth  analyses.  Although  within
and contact cases a unit of analysis, such as a neighborhood, may
million inhabitants while the United States, Spain,  and  coexist
distinct  and  unequal social conditions, this Italy test 10,266,
19,896, and 19,490, respectively.  is the smallest unit of analy‐
sis  possible  to  achieve  Additionally, it is important to note
that, due to a with the format used by the Brazilian  government.
lack of rapid tests in most health care units, COVID‐19 As previ‐
ously mentioned, to decrease the influence of testing  has  taken
place  in  specialized  laboratories, heterogeneity of data, this
study considered multiple clinics, and hospitals. Specifically in
Rio  de Janeiro, analysis techniques that addressed such dispari‐
ties, social inequality and poor access to health services as  is
the  case  of  quantile regression.  are probably contributing to
the higher cumulative The option to use the 2010  Census  as  the
incidence  in  the  wealthiest  regions, especially in population
base can also produce a discreet increase downtown and the south,
with  the  highest  per capita in the incident rates, considering
that the denominator income and the largest number of public  and
private is undersized. However, even if losing its validity, this
facilities. That is,  the  explanatory  hypothesis  is  that  the
choice  was made to facilitate comparison of results. At incident
rate is not truly low in the more impoverished the limit, the in‐
terpretation  of incidence rates could be regions, but that there
is rather a lower capacity to even lower, which would  constitute
more considerable detect the diseases in these locations.  under‐
reporting of COVID‐19 cases. Therefore, this study represents  an
advancement  in  the analysis of addressing Brazilian cities pro‐
file and the presence this phenomenon, mainly because it  consid‐
ers  that  Rafael  RMR,  Neto  M, Depret DG, Gil AC, Fonseca MHS,
Souza‐Santos R.  current investigations have contemplated  states
and  cities,  without  investigating  differences existing within
these places.  7. Jacobs MG, Pinto‐Junior  VL.  Brazilian  cities
profile,  the  occurence  of  tuberculosis and its drug‐resistant
form. Cienc Saude Coletiva. [Internet]. 2019 [cited  This  studys
results indicate the hypothesis that the diseases incidence rates
in the city of Rio de Janeiro are related to per  capita  income,
regardless  of  other  predictors. Considering the low testing in
Brazil, and consequent underreporting, already reported by  other
studies,  these  results  indicate  that COVID‐19 testing is more
widely disseminated in the wealthiest regions of the city. Poten‐
tially unequal access among suspected cases and the functionalist
role of capitalbased necropolitics should be considered in future
9.  Pescarini  JM,  Strina A, Nery JS, Skalinski LM, Andrade KVF.
Penna MLF, et al. Socioeconomic risk markers of analyses address‐
ing  this  matter,  primarily because and meta‐analysis. PLOS Ne‐
glect Trop D. [Internet].  of the need to better  document  cases
of  the  disease, decreasing potential inequalities in the access
to health services and designing better public  policies  to  10.
Goes  EF, Menezes GMS, Almeida MCC, Arajo TVB, deal with the pan‐
demic.  Alves SV, Alves MTSSB, et al.  Racial  vulnerability  and
individual  barriers  for Brazilian women seeking first care fol‐
lowing abortion. Cad Saude Publica. [Internet].  2020 [cited  Apr
17,  2020];36(Suppl  1):e00189618.  11. Novak JR, Peak T, Gast J,
Arnell M. Associations Men. Am J Mens  Health.  [Internet].  2019
[cited  2. World Health Organization. Naming the coronavirus dis‐
ease (COVID‐19) and the virus that causes it.   [Internet].  2020
[cited Apr 13, 2020]. Available 12. Jian‐Min J, Peng B, We H, Fei
W, Xiao‐Fang L, De‐Min H, et al. Gender differences  in  patients
with COVID‐19: focus on severity and mortality. MedRxiv 3. Rafael
RMR, Neto M, Carvalho MMB, David HMSL, 13. Thebault R, Ba Tran A,
Williams  V.  The  coronavirus Acioli S, Faria MGA. Epidemiology,
public policies and Covid‐19 pandemics in Brazil: what can we ex‐
pect?   alarmingly  high  rate. Washington Post. April 7, 2020 4.
Science in the time of COVID‐19. Nat Struct Mol Biol.  14. Kai L,
Ying C, Ruzheng L, Kunyuan H. Clinical feature of COVID‐19 in el‐
derly patients: A comparison what comes  next?  Science.  [Inter‐
net].  2020  [cited 15. Guan W, Liang W, Zhao Y, Liang H, Chen Z,
6. Ayebare RR, Flick R, Okware S, Bodo B, Lamorde M.   Li  Y,  et
al.  Comorbidity  and  its  impact  on  1590 Adoption of COVID‐19
triage strategies for low‐income settings. Lancet Resp Med.  [In‐
ternet]  2020  [cited  Rev.  Latino‐Am. Enfermagem 2020;28:e3344.
26. Pereira  SOG,  Cabral  JPC.  Informalidade  e  crise  Rio  de
Janeiro:  IPP;  2020 [Acesso 13 abr 2020].  17. Governo do Estado
do Rio de Janeiro. Painel 27. Liu Y, Gayle  AA,  Wilder‐Smith  A,
Rocklv  J. The reproductive number of COVID‐19 is higher compared
to SARS coronavirus. J Travel Med. [Internet]. 2020 18. Prefeitu‐
ra  da Cidade do Rio de Janeiro. Regies 28. Walker PGT, Whittaker
C, Watson O, Baguelin M, Ainslie KEC, Bhatia S, et al. The Global
Impact J Econ Perspect. [Internet]. 2001 [cited Apr 14, 20. World
Health Organization. Global Tuberculosis Report. [Internet] Gene‐
va:  WHO; 2019 [cited Apr 21. Lloyd‐Sherlock P, Ebrahim S, Geffen
L, McKee M.  Bearing the brunt of covid‐19: older people  in  low
and middle income countries. BMJ. [Internet] 2020 Disease Vulner‐
ability. Rand Health Q. [Internet] 2017 23.  Dahab  M,  Zandvoort
KV, Flasche S, Warsame A, Spiegel PB, Waldman RJ, et al. COVID‐10
control in low‐income settings and  displaced  populations:  what
can realistically be done? [Internet] 2020 [cited Apr 29. Univer‐
sidade de So Paulo.  Faculdade  de  Medicina  de  Ribeiro  Preto.
COVID‐19  BRASIL. Monitoramento e anlises da situao do Coronavrus
no Brasil.  [Internet]. 2020 [Acesso 17 abr 2020]. Disponvel  30.
Prado M, Bastos L, Batista A, Antunes B, Baio F, Maaira P, et al.
Nota Tcnica 4  21/03/2020 ‐ Anlise de subnotificao  do  nmero  de
casos  confirmados  da  COVID‐19  no  Brasil.  [Internet]. Rio de
Janeiro: Ncleo de Operaes e Inteligncia em Sade, PUCRio;  31.  Li
R, Pei S, Chen B, Song Y, Zhang T, Yang W, et al. Substantial un‐
documented infection facilitates  (SARS‐CoV2).  Science.  [Inter‐
net].  2020  [cited Mar 32. Chang D, Mo G, Yuan X, Tao X, Peng X,
Wang F, et al. Time Kinetics of Viral Clearance and Resolution of
Symptoms  in  Novel Coronavirus Infection. AJRCCM.  24. Universi‐
dade Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro.  Dinmica  socioespacial  da
COVID‐19  na  cidade  do  Rio de Janeiro e na Baixada Fluminense.
[Internet].  Rio de Janeiro: UFRRJ; 2020 [Acesso  16  abr  2020].
34.  Rache  B,  Rocha R, Nunes L, Spinola P, Malik AM, Massuda A.
Nota tcnica n. 3 ‐  Necessidades  de  Infraestrutura  do  SUS  em
Preparo ao COVID19: Leitos de UTI, Respiradores e Ocupao Hospita‐
lar.  25. Fundao Oswaldo Cruz. Instituto de Comunicao [Internet].
Rio  de Janeiro: Instituto de Estudos para Cientfica e Tecnolgica
em Sade. MonitoraCovid‐19.  Polticas de Sade; 2020 [Acesso 23 mar
2020].   Rafael  RMR,  Neto  M,  Depret  DG, Gil AC, Fonseca MHS,
Souza‐Santos R.  35. Ji Y, Ma Z, Peppelenbosch MP, Pan Q.  Poten‐
tial  healthcare  resource availability. Lancet Glob Health.  Ri‐
cardo Alexandre Arcncio Ricardo de Mattos Russo Rafael  Copyright
2020  Revista Latino‐Americana de Enfermagem offered. Recommended
for maximum dissemination and use of





























