SHORT  REPORT  Open  Access Evaluation of SARS‐CoV‐2 viral RNA in
fecal Alvaro Mesoraca, Katia Margiotti* ,  Antonella  Viola,  An‐
tonella  Cima,  Davide Sparacino and Claudio Giorlandino The need
for timely establishment of a complete diagnostic protocol of se‐
vere acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS‐CoV‐2) is de‐
manded worldwide. We selected 15 positive novel coronavirus  dis‐
ease  19  (COVID19)  patients with mild or no symptom. Initially,
fecal samples were negative in the  67%  (10/15)  of  the  cases,
while  33%  (5/10) of the cases were positive. After serial virus
RNA testing, 73% (11/15) of the cases resulted positive to  fecal
specimens. In particular, 15 days after the first positive respi‐
ratory specimens test, 6  fecal  specimens  became  positive  for
SARS‐CoV‐2  RNA,  while 13 respiratory test returned negative re‐
sult. In conclusion, qRT‐PCR assays of fecal specimens, is an im‐
portant  step  to  control infection, suggesting that samples re‐
mained positive for SARS‐CoV2 RNA longer  time  then  respiratory
tract  samples.  Our results enhance the recent knowledge on this
emerging infectious disease and offer suggestions for a more com‐
plete  diagnostic strategy.  Keywords: Acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS‐CoV‐2), SARS‐CoV‐2 viral  RNA,  Novel  coron‐
avirus disease 19 (COVID‐19), Fecal specimens, Respiratory speci‐
mens On December 31st 2019 China  reported  the  first  cases  of
atypical  pneumonia  in Wuhan, the capital of Hubei province. The
causative virus was found to be a Betacoronavirus, closely relat‐
ed  to  the  severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS‐
CoV‐1) from 2003 and similar to Sarbecoviruses isolated from bats
[1,  2].  It  was  therefore termed SARS‐CoV‐2 and the disease it
causes was named COVID‐19 (Corona Virus Disease 2019)  [3].   The
virus  genome  and early epidemiological and clinical features of
the infection in adults have been reported [46]. The infection is
estimated  to have about 5 days of incubation period and commonly
causes fever, cough, myalgia and pneumonia in patients [4].  Sev‐
eral  real  time  RT‐PCR  assays protocols for detection of SARS‐
CoV‐2 RNA have been developed and approved from Centers for  Dis‐
ease Control and Prevention Nucleic acid in US and are now widely
employed to diagnose COVID‐19 ALTAMEDICA, Human Genetics  labora‐
tories,  Altamedica  Main  Centre, Artemisia SpA, Viale Liegi 45,
00198 Rome, Italy disease [7, 8]. Current  scientific  literature
has  shown that viral RNA measurements from fecal specimens might
be last longer than that from respiratory tract [9, 10].  Herein,
we  selected fifteen positive patients for SARSCoV‐2 RNA in their
respiratory tract, and we followed the viral shedding from respi‐
ratory and gastrointestinal tracts by a series of respiratory and
fecal specimens test by real time RT‐PCR assays. Has been report‐
ed that the duration of viral shedding in fecal specimens, can be
detected for nearly 5 weeks after that the  patients  respiratory
samples tested negative for SARS‐CoV‐2 RNA [9].  Moreover, recent
meta‐analysis on 4243 COVID‐19 patients reported that stool  sam‐
ples  from 48.1% of patients tested positive for virus RNA, among
these patients 70.3% tested positive for  RNA  virus  even  after
respiratory specimens tested negative [11]. The aim of this study
was to evaluate SARS‐CoV‐2 virus fecal shedding and  duration  in
comparison with SARS‐CoV‐2 virus in the respiratory tract. Deter‐
mine whether a virus is still  present  in  the  gastrointestinal
tract  of  the patients several days after respiratory tract sam‐
ples became negative, which  permits  use,  sharing,  adaptation,
distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as
you give licence and your intended use is not permitted by statu‐
tory  regulation  or  exceeds the permitted use, you will need to
obtain RT Respiratory tract, FS Fecal specimens, F Female, M Male
is  important  in order to understand and define a complete diag‐
nostic strategy for SARS‐CoV‐2 viral Results and  discussion  Be‐
tween  March 4 and April 20, 2020, we collected every 5 days res‐
piratory and fecal specimens from fifteen COVID‐19 patients.  All
15 samples tested positive in their respiratory swab in the first
10 days, when all internal controls exhibit the expected  perfor‐
mance,  a  specimen  is  considered  positive if two out of three
SARSCoV‐2 target genes (gene E, gene N, gene ORF1ab) showed a cy‐
cle threshold (CT) values 41, as indicated on manufactural guide‐
lines (Novel Coronavirus (2019nCoV) Real  Time  Multiplex  RT‐PCR
kit,  LifeRiver  Ltd).   Among this 15 samples 67% (10/15) tested
negative in their fecal specimens, and 33% (5/10) tested positive
in samples became positive 2 weeks after their first positive fe‐
cal specimens positive for SARS‐CoV‐2 RNA virus,  6  samples  re‐
mained  positive until the end of the sampling patients had fecal
samples positive test 25 days more in  accordance  with  previous
study were has been shown that rectal swabs can become and remain
positive for longer time after the respiratory specimens  testing
had  become  negative  [9,  10]. Even though patients had mild or
non‐symptoms, is well none that asymptomatic transmission is pos‐
sible,  and  potential fecal‐oral transmission must to be consid‐
ered to reduce the risk of transmission.   Respiratory  transmis‐
sion is still the primary route for SARS‐CoV‐2 infection and fur‐
ther research on this field must be done in order  to  understand
SARS‐CoV‐2  virus  better  and implement the diagnostic strategy.
Our preliminary data support the idea that negative fecal result,
might be a necessary criterion in addition to the actual two con‐
secutive negative testing in respiratory samples, before  consid‐
ering the patients completely recovered and no more infective.  A
total of fifteen patients with mild or no symptoms were  selected
for this study. This case series was approved by the institution‐
al Ethics Committee of Artemisia SpA. Fifteen patients with  res‐
piratory  specimens  positive for SARS‐CoV‐2 RNA virus from March
4, to April 20, 2020 were enrolled.  Oral  consent  was  obtained
from patients. The respiratory and fecal specimens were collected
every 5 days from March 4, 2020, until final date of  the  study.
The  diagnosis  by  real‐time  RT‐PCR kits (QIAamp Viral RNA Mini
Kit, Catalog #: 52904, QIAGEN). The Real‐time RT‐PCR was done  by
using  the  Novel Coronavirus (2019‐nCoV) Real Time Multiplex RT‐
PCR kit from LifeRiver Ltd., and iQ5 real‐time PCR detection sys‐
tem  (Bio‐Rad,  Hercules,  CA, USA) following the manufacture in‐
struction. The kit measures simultaneously 3 target genes:  SARS‐
CoV‐2  gene  E,  gene N, gene ORF1ab thus complying with interna‐
tional validated testing protocols (Novel Coronavirus (2019‐nCoV)
Real  Time  Multiplex  RT‐PCR kit, LifeRiver Ltd).  A fecal SARS‐
CoV‐2 RNA virus test using real‐time RTPCR techniques was used to
evaluate  the virus shedding 2 weeks after a positive respiratory
tract swab. Results from this study  demonstrated  that  patients
had  fecal samples positive test 25 days more than their respira‐
tory tract test. Some limitations refer to the number of  samples
analysed,  more  samples will better define the virus shedding in
feces and the utility to recommend routine fecal specimens  tast‐
ing.  In  conclusion, fecal specimens has great potential benefit
for more accurate screening of SARS‐CoV‐2 infections, and it  has
already   generated  vast  interest  in  the  medical  community.
COVID‐19: Corona Virus Disease 2019; SARS‐CoV‐2: Acute respirato‐
ry  syndrome  coronavirus 2 Not applicable.  AM, and KM conceived
the study and provided insights on data.  DS,  AV  performed  the
laboratory  analyses. CG participated in conceiving the study Not
applicable.  Availability of data and materials  Not  applicable.
Ethics approval and consent to participate The study was approved
by the local ethical committee of Artemisia SPA, and all partici‐
pating patients given them oral consent.  Consent for publication
Not applicable.  Competing interests Not applicable.   1.  Wu  F,
Zhao  S,  Yu  B,  Chen Y‐M, Wang W, Song Z‐G, et al. A new coron‐
avirus associated with human respiratory disease  in  China.  Na‐
ture.  2020;579(7798): 2. Zhou P, Yang X‐L, Wang X‐G, Hu B, Zhang
L, Zhang W, et al. A pneumonia outbreak  associated  with  a  new
coronavirus  of  probable  bat  origin. Nature.  3. Coronaviridae
Study Group of the International Committee on Taxonomy of  Virus‐
es.  The species Severe acute respiratory syndrome‐related coron‐
avirus: classifying 2019‐nCoV and naming it SARS‐CoV‐2.  Nat  Mi‐
crobiol.  2020;5(4): 4. Chen N, Zhou M, Dong X, Qu J, Gong F, Han
Y, et al. Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 99 cas‐
es  of  2019  novel  coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a de‐
scriptive study. Lancet. 2020;395(10223):50713.  5. Huang C, Wang
Y,  Li  X,  Ren  L, Zhao J, Hu Y, et al. Clinical features of pa‐
tients infected with 2019  novel  coronavirus  in  Wuhan,  China.
Lancet.   6.  Wang  D,  Hu B, Hu C, Zhu F, Liu X, Zhang J, et al.
Clinical characteristics of 138 hospitalized patients  with  2019
novel  coronavirus‐infected  pneumonia  in  Wuhan,  China.  JAMA.
2020;323(11):10619.  7. Chu DKW,  Pan  Y,  Cheng  SMS,  Hui  KPY,
Krishnan  P,  Liu Y, et al. Molecular diagnosis of a novel coron‐
avirus (2019‐nCoV) causing an outbreak of pneumonia.  Clin  Chem.
2020;66(4):54955.   8. Corman VM, Landt O, Kaiser M, Molenkamp R,
Meijer A, Chu DK, et al.  Detection  of  2019  novel  coronavirus
(2019‐nCoV)  by  real‐time  RT‐PCR.  Euro 9. Wu Y, Guo C, Tang L,
Hong Z, Zhou J, Dong X, et al. Prolonged presence  of  SARS‐CoV‐2
viral  RNA in faecal samples. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2020;
10. Xu Y, Li X, Zhu B, Liang H, Fang C, Gong Y, et al. Character‐
istics  of  pediatric SARS‐CoV‐2 infection and potential evidence
for persistent fecal viral shedding.  Nat  Med.  2020;26(4):5025.
11.  Cheung  KS,  Hung IF, Chan PP, Lung KC, Tso E, Liu R, et al.
Gastrointestinal manifestations of SARS‐CoV‐2 infection and virus
load in fecal samples from











































