RESEARCH ARTICLE Open Access Iron metabolism and lymphocyte char‐
acterisation during Covid‐19 infection in ICU patients: an obser‐
vational  cohort  Giuliano  Bolondi1* , Emanuele Russo1, Emiliano
Gamberini1, Alessandro Circelli1, Manlio  Cosimo  Claudio  Meca1,
Etrusca  Brogi1,  Lorenzo  Viola1, Luca Bissoni1, Venerino Polet‐
ti2,3 and Vanni Agnoletti1 Background: Iron metabolism and immune
response  to  SARS‐CoV‐2 have not been described yet in intensive
care patients, although they  are  likely  involved  in  Covid‐19
pathogenesis.   Methods: We performed an observational study dur‐
ing the peak of pandemic  in  our  intensive  care  unit,  dosing
Ddimer,  C‐reactive  protein,  troponin T, lactate dehydrogenase,
ferritin, serum iron, transferrin, transferrin saturation, trans‐
ferrin  soluble  receptor, lymphocyte count and NK, CD3, CD4, CD8
and B subgroups of 31 patients during the first 2 weeks of  their
ICU  stay. Correlation with mortality and severity at the time of
admission was tested with the Spearman coefficient and  MannWhit‐
ney  test.  Trends  over  time were tested with the KruskalWallis
analysis.  Results: Lymphopenia is severe and  constant,  with  a
nadir  on  day  2  of ICU stay (median 0.555 109/L; interquartile
range (IQR) 0.450 109/L); all lymphocytic subgroups are  dramati‐
cally reduced in critically ill patients, while CD4/CD8 ratio re‐
mains normal. Neither ferritin nor lymphocyte count follows  sig‐
nificant  trends  in  ICU patients. Transferrin saturation is ex‐
tremely reduced at ICU admission (median 9%; IQR 7%),  then  sig‐
nificantly  increases  at  days  3 to 6 (median 33%, IQR 26.5%, p
value 0.026). The same trend is observed with serum  iron  levels
(median  25.5 g/L, IQR 69 g/L at admission; median 73 g/L, IQR 56
g/L on days 3 to 6) without  reaching  statistical  significance.
Hyperferritinemia  is constant during intensive care stay: howev‐
er, its dosage might be helpful in individuating patients  devel‐
oping  haemophagocytic  lymphohistiocytosis.  D‐dimer is elevated
and progressively increases from admission (median 1319 g/L;  IQR
1285 g/L) to days 3 to 6 (median 6820 g/L; IQR 6619 g/L), despite
not reaching significant results. We describe trends of  all  the
abovementioned  parameters during ICU stay.  Conclusions: The de‐
scription of iron metabolism and lymphocyte count in Covid‐19 pa‐
tients admitted to the intensive care unit provided with this pa‐
per might allow a wider understanding of SARS‐CoV‐2 pathophysiol‐
ogy.   Keywords:  MeSH  repository  (3‐10), Iron, COVID‐19, SARS‐
CoV‐2, Coronavirus, Critical care, Lymphocytes, Lymphopenia, Fer‐
ritins, Immunity, Coagulation The work was conducted in the Anes‐
thesia and Intensive Care Unit of the Bufalini Hospital in Cesena
(Italy).   Anesthesia  and Intensive Care Unit, AUSL Romagna  Bu‐
falini Hospital, viale Ghirotti  286,  47521  Cesena,  FC,  Italy
which  permits  use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and repro‐
duction in any medium or format, as long as you give licence  and
your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or ex‐
ceeds the permitted use, you will need  to  obtain  Covid‐19  has
been  declared  a  pandemic by World Health Organization (WHO) on
the 11th of March. The high contagiousness and the previously un‐
known  clinical  features  of  this new viral infection put under
pressure healthcare systems and clinicians worldwide.  Early  re‐
ports  from  the Chinese province of Hubei described some predic‐
tive biomarkers for the  clinical  outcome  of  hospitalised  pa‐
tients,  namely  lymphopenia  and  the elevation of D‐dimer, fer‐
ritin, interleukin 6 (IL‐6), troponin and  myoglobin,  C‐reactive
protein  (CRP)  and  lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) [1, 2]. LDH is a
marker of parenchymal lung damage, and troponin and myoglobin are
markers of myocardial and muscular involvement, while the remain‐
ing molecules belong to the group of  positive  acute‐phase  pro‐
teins (APP).  Ferritin is a crucial component of iron metabolism,
one of  the  most  ancestral  systems  of  host  protection  from
pathogen  infections  [3].  Iron is a micronutrient necessary for
both energy production at a mitochondrial level and nucleic  acid
replication at cytoplasmic and nuclear level. For its scarcity in
the human body and the fundamental processes in which it  is  in‐
volved,  pathogens  (bacterial, viral or fungal) compete with the
host for iron availability in order to guarantee their own repli‐
cation.   When innate immunity is activated and cytokine cascades
start, IL‐1 and IL‐6 stimulate hepcidin expression in the  liver,
reducing  iron  bioavailability  by decreasing its gut absorption
and hiding it into ferritin, a shell‐like molecule  deposited  in
macrophages.  These  mechanisms  Lymphopenia  and specific T cell
lineage affection are characteristic  features  of  Covid‐19  and
have  been  correlated  with  poorer prognosis [911]. In previous
coronavirus outbreaks, such as SARS, the peak of viral  load  oc‐
curred  7  days after symptoms development, followed by elevation
in IL‐6 and IL‐8, nadir lymphocyte count and successive pulmonary
infiltrates.  This  description  suggests  that clinical symptoms
might be mediated by the immune system deregulation  rather  than
direct  viral damage [12]. The distribution of different subtypes
of T cells in peripheral blood of symptomatic critical  and  non‐
critical  Covid‐19 patients has been described [1316].  With this
observational study, we aim to provide a detailed description  of
iron  metabolism  and  lymphocyte  subpopulations in ICU Covid‐19
population. It can lead to a better understanding of the underly‐
ing physiopathology of this unknown disease, foreseeing some pos‐
sible alternative therapeutic targets.  Reported cases  In‐hospi‐
tal  pre‐ICU  LOS (days) ICU LOS CT scan (L:H) Intubated patients
(%) Pro‐coagulative disorders (%) Admitted from other centres (%)
4 men still admitted in our ICU BMI body mass index, CRRT contin‐
uous renal‐replacement therapy, CT scan computed tomography (only
those with both images and radiologic report availableH stays for
high‐elastance pattern and L stays  for  low‐elastance  pattern),
ICU  intensive  care unit, IQR interquartile range, LOS length of
stay, Mortality 21 men over 25 enrolled because 4  are  still  in
our ICU, PFmed means PaO2/FiO2 ratio during the first 24 h of ICU
stay, PLR platelet‐to‐lymphocyte ratio on the day of  ICU  admis‐
sion,   Pnx  pneumothorax,  Pro‐coagulative  disorders  deep‐vein
thrombosis, ischaemic stroke or massive pulmonary  embolism,  VAP
ventilator‐acquired  pneumonia Study population This is a single‐
centre  retrospective  observational  cohort  study.  The   first
COVID‐19‐positive patient in our ICU has been admitted on the 5th
of March 2020. Data collection goes from the 6th of March to  the
6th of April 2020, following the local peak of epidemic. A proto‐
col was established to test predictive biomarkers. On the day  of
ICU admission and then twice‐a‐week (on Monday and Thursday), ev‐
ery ICU patient was tested for ferritin, serum iron,  transferrin
and transferrin saturation (TfSat), soluble receptor of transfer‐
rin, CRP, D‐dimer, LDH, troponin, lymphocyte count and character‐
isation  of  T  cells  (CD3,  CD4 and CD8), B cells and NK cells.
Then, data were divided in the  following  sub‐categories:  TI1‐2
(first  dosage made on ICU admission), TI3‐6 (dosage between days
3 and 6 of ICU stay), TI 7‐10 and TI  11‐14.  We  observed  their
trends  during  the  first 2 weeks of ICU stay. Due to laboratory
restrictions, just 9 patients were tested for interleukin‐6 (IL6)
only  on  the  day  of  admission [17].  Inclusion criteria Every
SARS‐CoV‐2‐positive patient (oropharyngeal swab or  bronchoalveo‐
lar lavage sample, PCR test) admitted to our ICU was automatical‐
ly enrolled in the study. Overall, 31 patients entered in the fi‐
nal  data analysis fulfilling inclusion criteria. Importantly, we
count ICU length of stay (LOS) from the day of admission  in  the
first  ICU: Fig. 1 Iron parameters. Distribution over time of the
tested iron parameters with their units of measure. Box plots in‐
dicate  median  with  interquartile range, and dots indicate out‐
liers. Groups specify the timing by which the dosage was effectu‐
ated  form the moment of ICU admission, and round brackets in the
lower line indicate the number of patients tested for each group.
In  e, asterisk indicates significant difference (p value > 0.05)
this means that dosages of patients transferred to our unit  from
other  ICUs  do not start from day 1.  Data collection ended with
the following criteria Data collection was stopped after  day  18
of  ICU stay; iron‐related data analysis was stopped or not taken
into account for the final analysis if  bacterial  infection  oc‐
curred, since we considered it a known confounding factor for in‐
flammatory response; patients were discharged from  our  analysis
on  the  date of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) start
(3 patients) or death.  Fig. 2  Lymphocytes  count.  Distribution
over  time  of lymphocytes and their tested subgroups, with their
units of measure. Box plots indicate  median  with  interquartile
range,  and  dots indicate outliers. Groups specify the timing by
which the dosage was effectuated form the  moment  of  over  time
more  readable Serum iron (g/L) Transferrin Saturation (%) Trans‐
ferrin Receptor (mg/L) Data are  all  expressed  as  median,  in‐
terquartile  range  between brackets and number of measured cases
in the second line Exclusion criteria All patients  admitted  for
strict  clinical  monitoring and discharged within 48 h from ICU;
all admitted patients who tested negative for SARS‐CoV‐2; and  no
underage  patients  were  included. Overall, 6 patients were ini‐
tially tested but then excluded from the final analysis  for  the
abovementioned  criteria.   The primary outcome was a descriptive
analysis of iron metabolism values and lymphocyte  count  in  ICU
patients.  Then,  as  a  secondary outcome, we tried to correlate
iron metabolism parameters and lymphocyte count with mortality or
severity  at  the moment of ICU admission. Severity at the moment
of  ICU  admission  was  quantified  with  two  parameters:  mean
PaO2/FiO2 ratio Measurement technology Iron parameters were test‐
ed with Cobas analyser systems (Roche), while lymphocyte subpopu‐
lations  with  the  Navios  EX flow cytometer (Beckman Coultrer).
Statistical analysis The formula used to estimate TfSat (TfSat  =
serum iron/(transferrin  1.42)  100) is not reliable for ferritin
values above 1200 g/L: in this case, those values  were  not  in‐
cluded  in final analysis. Statistical analysis was performed us‐
ing the software IBM SPSS 22.0. Data are reported  as  mean  with
standard  deviation  (std. dev.), median with interquartile range
(IQR), number and percentage, depending on  underlying  distribu‐
tion.  Students t test, MannWhitney, KruskalWallis, Spearman cor‐
relation and 2 tests were used for statistical analysis.  partic‐
ularly elevated because in our Hospital are present sub‐intensive
care units and because ICU stay lower than 48 h (only for  strict
monitoring  purposes)  was an exclusion criteria. It is therefore
likely the analysis accounts for a population of severely affect‐
ed  patients.  CT  scan patterns of low (L) or high (H) elastance
refer to the phenotypes proposed by Gattinoni et al. [20]. Due to
the  exiguity of our sample and the different focus of our A sig‐
nificant increase of TfSat levels (%) occurs between the first 48
h  of  ICU  stay  and days 3 to 6 (Mann Whitney, p value = 0.026,
Fig. 1). No other significant trends and  modifications  of  iron
parameters  and  lymphocyte  subpopulations were found during ICU
stay.  Lymphocytes and their subpopulations do not show  signifi‐
cant  trends of modification either.  Trends and modifications of
iron parameters are reported in Fig. 1, while trends and  modifi‐
cations  of  lymphocytes  count and lymphocytic subgroups are re‐
ported in Fig. 2.  Looking to secondary  outcomes,  neither  iron
parameters nor lymphocyte count correlate with mortality, The al‐
ready described survival predictors in general  hospital  popula‐
tion  (LDH,  troponin, CRP and D‐dimer) Data are all expressed as
median, interquartile range between brackets and number  of  mea‐
sured  cases in the second line Data are all expressed as median,
interquartile range between brackets and number of measured cases
in the second line are not significantly associated with outcome,
PLR or D‐dimer shows a non‐significant tendency to increase after
ICU  admission (KruskalWallis, p value = 0.108, Fig. 3). IL6 ele‐
vation is lower than reported by other studies on critically  ill
Covid‐19 patients [21]. We found a debile correlation between IL6
levels and lymphocyte count on the day of ICU admission (8 cases,
Spearman rho 0.714, p value = 0.047), but the analysis is limited
by the low amount of cases.   Cytokines  release  hyper‐expresses
hepcidin, leading to ferroportin internalisation and reduced iron
absorption and availability in body fluids [22, 23].  Serum  iron
and  TfSat are known to decrease early after infections, inhibit‐
ing iron availability to the pathogen, but then return to almost‐
normal  values within 710 days [24, 25]. The role of dysregulated
iron response in Covid‐19 has been Serum iron does not show  sig‐
nificant  modifications,  but  it follows the same trend of TfSat
being part of the formula to calculate it. They both remain lower
than  the  normal reference values during the whole infection. It
is difficult to hypothesise the reason  of  their  trend  without
proper laboratory research: the dramatic low levels at ICU admis‐
sion might be expected, but  the  following  increase  during  an
acute phase of inflammatory response seems counter‐intuitive. The
described patients arrived in our ICU after a median of  7  to  9
days from symptoms onset: the physiologic progressive restoration
of normal TfSat after 1 week of infection  and  the  dysregulated
cytokine  response might contribute to TfSat elevation.  Also, it
has been  described  that  acute  respiratory  distress  syndrome
(ARDS)  causes reduced serum iron levels [27]: intubated Covid‐19
patients suffer of this syndrome,  while  protective  ventilation
might  theoretically  restore  normal iron levels.  Ferritin is a
very early and non‐specific indicator of inflammation. It result‐
ed to be the first severely elevated biomarker together with lym‐
phopenia [1]: thus, its early dosage in at‐home  symptomatic  pa‐
tients  might  be extremely useful in individuating those who can
benefit of early hospital admission. After its initial rise, fer‐
ritin  can  take longer than a month to normalise after an infec‐
tion [24]. Thus, it remains elevated during ICU stay of  Covid‐19
patients. Despite being apparently futile, its dosage constitutes
the key element to suspect secondary haemophagocytic lymphohisti‐
ocytosis  (sHLH).  sHLH is a frequently misdiagnosed syndrome re‐
lated to viral infections and thus of primary importance in  this
Covid19  pandemic. Overall, despite unable of a more detailed de‐
scription, we demonstrate how iron metabolism is deranged in  se‐
vere  forms  of  Covid‐19.  Lymphocytes are constantly reduced in
ICU Covid‐19 patients with respect to reference values.  All  the
subsets are also dramatically reduced, more than reported by oth‐
er recent publications referring to non‐ICU populations [9,  28].
We  observe  a conserved CD4/CD8 ratio.  The nadir of lymphopenia
is on day 2 of ICU stay; a progressive tendency towards  normali‐
sation  is more evident in patients experiencing positive outcome
and ICU discharge. Similar timing of lymphocyte modifications was
observed during severe acute respiratory disease (SARS) outbreak,
despite with less dramatic reduction [29, 30].  Troponin T (ng/L)
Fig.  3  D‐dimer levels. D‐dimer levels over time from the moment
of ICU admission. It is observable a  non‐significant  trend  to‐
wards  increase after the first 48 h. It might be relevant to ex‐
plain the increased tendency to  hypercoagulability  of  Covid‐19
patients. Box plots indicate median with interquartile range, and
dots indicate outliers. Groups specify the timing  by  which  the
dosage was effectuated form the moment of ICU admission Being re‐
ferred to critically ill patients, this more severe reduction  of
all  lymphocyte  subgroups  might be an indicator of severity. To
date, no other publications are available about  ICU  populations
on lymphocytes Being such a specific subset of critically ill pa‐
tients, many significant differences were not observable  between
survivors  and  non.  These data might be relevant to researchers
for a better understanding of the altered immunologic response in
severely  affected  patients and to ICU clinicians.  The study is
affected by some limitations. The sanitary emergency and the pre‐
viously  unknown characteristics of this disease led to many dif‐
ficulties. During the initial phase, it  has  been  difficult  to
create  an  effective  protocol  shared between the operators and
some data have been missed. We have frequently acted as a  backup
hospital  to  relieve  other  overloaded  ICUs nearby: this means
that, for a part of the reported cases, the first few days of ICU
stay  occurred  in  a  different  unit and the dosage of relevant
markers was missed during that initial phase. Being a monocentric
study  conceived  during  an  emergency phase, the sample size is
limited and cannot be increased: this led to the impossibility to
detect  and  describe some more subtle physiologic processes. Fi‐
nally, slightly different therapeutic approaches  have  been  ap‐
plied  to  patients following ongoing findings and different com‐
plications (ventilatoracquired pneumonia, pro‐coagulative states,
renal  and  hepatic  insufficiency) have affected patients evolu‐
tion: it is not possible to quantify how  these  differences  af‐
fected  iron  metabolism  and lymphocyte count.  We describe iron
metabolism, lymphocyte subgroups count and  other  biomarkers  in
critically  ill  Covid‐19  patients.  This  might be relevant for
clinicians dealing with critical  patients  and  provide  further
hints about the pathophysiology of this disease.  Iron metabolism
has been repeatedly proposed as a  potential  therapeutic  target
during  infections  [31,  32].   Pharmacologic advances have made
available safer iron chelators [33]. This testifies the relevance
of  the  topics investigated and how they might contribute to the
development of novel  therapeutic  strategies  against  Covid‐19.
APP:  Acute phase‐proteins; ARDS: Acute respiratory distress syn‐
drome; CRP: C‐reactive protein; CRRT: Continuous  renal  replace‐
ment  therapy;  ECMO:  Extracorporeal  membrane oxygenation; HLH:
Haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; IL‐6:  Interleukin  6;  IQR:
Interquartile  range;  LDH: Lactate dehydrogenase; LOS: Length of
stay; MOF: Multiple organ failure; PCR:  Polymerase  chain  reac‐
tion;  PFmed:  Mean  PaO2/FiO2 ratio during the first 24 h of ICU
admission; PLR: Platelet‐to‐lymphocyte ratio on the  day  of  ICU
admission; PPE: Personal protective equipment; SARS: Severe acute
respiratory syndrome; SARS‐CoV‐2: SARS coronavirus type 2; TfSat:
Transferrin  saturation  (%); VAP: Ventilator‐acquired pneumonia;
WHO: World Health investigation  protocol  in  such  a  difficult
time; we also thank Prof. Drakesmith incitation in continuing our
data collection and Prof.  Antonio  Lucariello  (Universit  degli
Studi  di Napoli, Federico II) for his contribution to the under‐
standing of iron metabolism.  BG  conceived  the  study  project,
wrote the paper and collected scientific analysis and contributed
to the drafting; GE, CA, MMCC, BE, VL and BL contributed  to  the
data  collection,  database  curation and drafting; PV and Avail‐
ability of data and materials The datasets used and analysed dur‐
ing the current study are available from Ethics approval and con‐
sent to participate Protocol IR‐COV, version 21st of April  2020,
approved by the Romagna Ethical Consent for publication All clin‐
ical data are completely anonymised; discharged patients are  be‐
ing  telephonically contacted to get informed consent.  Competing
interests Anesthesia and Intensive Care Unit, AUSL  Romagna   Bu‐
falini  Hospital,  viale  Ghirotti  286, 47521 Cesena, FC, Italy.
2Department of Respiratory Diseases & Respiratory Diseases,  AUSL
Romagna ‐ Morgagni Hospital, Forl, Italy.  1. Zhou F, Yu T, Du R,
Fan G, Liu Y, Liu Z, et al. Clinical course and risk factors  for
mortality  of  adult  inpatients with COVID‐19 in Wuhan, China: a
retrospective cohort study. Lancet.  2020;6736:19.   2.  Ruan  Q,
Yang K, Wang W, Jiang L, Song J. Clinical predictors of mortality
due to COVID ‐ 19 based on an analysis of data  of  150  patients
from 3. Pietrangelo A. Pathogens, metabolic adaptation, and human
diseases  ‐  an  iron‐thrifty  genetic  model.  Gastroenterology.
2015;149:834.   4. Cassat JE, Skaar EP. Iron in infection and im‐
munity. Cell Host Microbe. 2013; 5. Drakesmith H, Prentice A. Vi‐
ral infection and iron metabolism. Nat Rev 6. Drakesmith H, Pren‐
tice AM. Hepcidin and the iron‐infection axis. Science.  7.  Lit‐
ton  E, Lim J. Iron metabolism: an emerging therapeutic target in
critical illness. Crit Care Critical Care. 2019;23:18.   8.  Ganz
T. Anemia of inflammation. N Engl J Med. 2019;381:114857.  9. Qin
C, Zhou L, Hu Z, Zhang S, Yang S, Tao Y, et al. Dysregulation  of
immune  response in patients with COVID‐19 in Wuhan, China Chuan.
Clin 10. Huang I, Pranata R. Lymphopenia  in  severe  coronavirus
disease‐2019  11.  Velavan  TP,  Meyer  CG.  Mild  versus  severe
COVID‐19: laboratory markers. Int  J  Infect  Dis.  2020;95:3047.
12. Wang W, Chen S, I‐Jun L, Kao C, Chen H, Chiang B, et al. Tem‐
poral relationship of viral load, ribavirin,  interleukin  (IL)6,
IL‐8, and clinical progression in patients with severe acute res‐
piratory syndrome. Clin Infect 13.  Cossarizza  A,  De  Biasi  S,
Guaraldi  G, Girardis M, Mussini C. Modena Covid‐19 Working Group
(MoCo19). SARS‐CoV‐2, the virus that causes  COVID‐19:  cytometry
and  the  new  challenge for global health. Cytometry A. 2020;97:
14. Liu R, Wang Y, Li J, Han H, Xia Z, Liu F, et al. Decreased  T
cell   populations   contribute  to  the  increased  severity  of
COVID‐19. Clin Chim Acta. 2020;508: 15. Wan S, Yi Q, Fan S, Lv J,
Zhang  X,  Guo  L, et al. Relationships among lymphocyte subsets,
cytokines, and the pulmonary inflammation  index  in  coronavirus
(COVID‐19) infected patients. Br J Haematol. 2020;189:42837.  16.
Wang F, Nie J, Wang H, Zhao Q, Xiong Y, Deng L, et al. Character‐
istics  of  peripheral  lymphocyte  subset alteration in COVID‐19
pneumonia. J Infect 17. Aziz M, Fatima R, Assaly R. Elevated  in‐
terleukin‐6  and severe COVID‐19: a 18. Ranieri VM, Rubenfeld GD,
Thompson BT, Ferguson ND, Caldwell E, Fan E, et al. Acute  respi‐
ratory  distress syndrome: The Berlin definition. JAMA. 2012; 19.
Qu R, Ling Y, Zhang Y, Wei L, Chen X, Li X, et  al.  Platelet‐to‐
lymphocyte  ratio  is  associated with prognosis in patients with
coronavirus disease‐19.  20. Gattinoni L, Chiumello D, Caironi P,
Busana  M,  Romitti F, Brazzi L, et al.  COVID‐19 pneumonia: dif‐
ferent respiratory treatment for different 21. Tu W‐J, Cao J,  Yu
L,  Hu X, Liu Q. Clinicolaboratory study of 25 fatal cases of 22.
Nemeth E, Tuttle MS, Powelson J, Vaughn MD, Donovan A, Ward  DMV,
et  al.   Hepcidin  regulates  cellular iron efflux by binding to
ferroportin   and   inducing   its   internalization.    Science.
2004;306:20903.   23.  Sabelli M, Montosi G, Garuti C, Caleffi A,
Oliveto S, Biffo S, et al. Human macrophage  ferroportin  biology
and the basis for the ferroportin disease.  24. Eskeland B, Baer‐
heim A, Ulvik R, Hunskaar S. Influence of mild infections on iron
status  parameters  in  women  of  reproductive age. Scand J Prim
Health 25. Punnonen K, Irjala K, Rajamki A. Serum transferrin re‐
ceptor  and  its ratio to serum ferritin in the diagnosis of iron
deficiency. Blood. 1997;89:10527.  26. Edeas M, Saleh J, Peysson‐
naux  C.  Iron: innocent bystander or vicious culprit in COVID‐19
pathogenesis? Int J Infect Dis. Int J Infect Dis; 2020; Available
27.  Stites  SW,  Nelson ME, Wesselius LJ. Transferrin concentra‐
tions in serum and lower respiratory tract fluid of  mechanically
ventilated  patients  with  COPD  or ARDS. Chest. 1995;107:16815.
29. He Z, Zhao C, Dong Q, Zhuang H, Song S, Peng G,  et  al.  Ef‐
fects of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus in‐
fection on peripheral blood lymphocytes and their subsets. Int  J
Infect  Dis. 2005;9:32330.  30. Wong RSM, Wu A, To KF, Lee N, Lam
CWK, Wong CK, et al. Haematological  manifestations  in  patients
with  severe  acute respiratory syndrome: Retrospective analysis.
Br Med J. 2003;326:135862.  31. Dalamaga M,  Karampela  I,  Mant‐
zoros  CS. Commentary: Could iron chelators prove to be useful as
an adjunct to COVID‐19 treatment regimens?  32. Liu W,  Zhang  S,
Nekhai  S, Liu S. Depriving iron supply to the virus represents a
promising adjuvant  therapeutic  against  viral  survival.  Curr.
Clin.   33.  Bernhardt  PV. Coordination chemistry and biology of
chelators for the treatment of iron  overload  disorders.  Dalton
Trans. 2007;30:321420.









