IMAGES  IN NEUROLOGY Bilateral trochlear nerve palsy due to cere‐
bral vasculitis related to COVID‐19 infection Paralisia bilateral
do  nervo troclear por vasculite cerebral relacionada  infeco por
COVID‐19 Roberto de Magalhes Carneiro de OLIVEIRA1, Diogo  Haddad
SANTOS1,   Bruno  Casola  OLIVETTI2,  Jorge  Tomio  TAKAHASHI2  A
69‐year‐old Caucasian man presented fever  (38C)  with  abdominal
pain,  left  posterior  chest  pain without cough or dyspnea, and
mild occipital headache that persisted  in  the  next  few  days.
Eleven  days later, he woke up with binocular diplopia and severe
stabbing occipital headache. There were no  peripheral  signs  of
systemic  vasculitis.  The neurological evaluation identified bi‐
lateral paresis of the fourth cranial  nerve.  He  had  well‐con‐
trolled  arterial  hypertension and denied trauma or use of other
medications. COVID‐19 infection  was  confirmed  by  the  reverse
transcription  technique  followed  by  polymerase chain reaction
(RT‐PCR) in a nasopharyngeal swab.  A  brain  magnetic  resonance
imaging (MRI) with MRI angiography and vessel wall imaging showed
signs of vasculitis of the vertebrobasilar system1,  as  well  as
inflammatory radiologic signs in the periaqueductal region, along
computed tomography (CT) showed  peripheral  parenchymal  ground‐
glass opacities, suggesting viral pneumonia.  Cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) revealed 2 cells/mm3 (69% lymphocytes,  29%  monocytes,  2%
macrophages)  and  proteins  slightly increased to 46 mg/dL (with
17.01% gamma globulin). CSF antibody  testing  was  negative  for
syphilis  and  other  viruses.  Rheumatological causes, hypovita‐
minosis, and thyroid dysfunction were ruled out. Erythrocyte sed‐
imentation  rate  (ESR)  was  33 mm/h. He received IV methylpred‐
nisolone for five days with  complete  improvement  of  pain  and
diplopia.   This  is the first case report of cerebral vasculitis
related to COVID‐19 infection in an adult patient.  We  emphasize
that  headache2 could be a warning sign of cerebral vasculitis in
these individuals.  (B) shows mild abnormal  concentric  enhance‐
ment of the basilar artery wall (arrow) and intense abnormal con‐
centric enhancement of the vertebral artery wall, which are  tor‐
tuous  and lateralized to the left (arrow). (C) Reformatted Coro‐
nal Oblique 3D‐T1 FATSAT postcontrast vessel wall  imaging  shows
abnormal  concentric  enhancement  of  the  basilar and vertebral
artery walls (arrows).  Hospital Alemo Oswaldo Cruz, Departamento
de Neurologia, So Paulo SP, Brazil.  Hospital Alemo Oswaldo Cruz,
Departamento de Neurorradiologia, So Paulo SP,  Brazil.   Roberto
de  Magalhes  Carneiro de OLIVEIRA Bruno Casola OLIVETTI Conflict
of interest: There is no conflict of interest to  declare.   Man‐
dell  DM, Mossa‐Basha M, Qiao Y, Hess CP, Hui F, Matouk C, et al.
Intracranial vessel wall MRI:  principles  and  expert  consensus
recommendations  of  the American Society of Neuroradiology. AJNR
Am J Arq Neuropsiquiatr 2020;78(6):385‐386 Mao L, Jon H, Wang  M,
Hu Y, Chen S, He Q, et al. Neurologic manifestations of hospital‐
ized patients with Coronavirus disease


















