Overcoming  barriers  to  providing  comprehensive inpatient care
during the COVID‐19 pandemic  Anna  Miethke‐Morais0  0  ‐0  02‐85
0‐8051 ,* Beatriz Perondi0 0 ‐0 02‐85 0‐8051 , Leila Harima0 0 ‐0
02‐85 0‐8051 , Amanda C. Montal0  0  ‐0  02‐85  0‐8051  ,  Renato
Madrid  Baldassare,  Danielle  P. Moraes, Lucila Pedroso, Marcelo
C.A. Ramos, Solange R.G. Fusco,  Antonio  Jose  Pereira,  Tarcsio
E.P.  Barros‐Filho0 0 ‐0 02‐85 0‐8051 , Eloisa Bonfa, Edivaldo M.
Utiyama0 0 ‐0 02‐85 0‐8051 , Aluisio  C.  Segurado  Hospital  das
Clinicas  HCFMUSP,  Faculdade  de  Medicina,  Universidade de Sao
Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP, BR.  Miethke‐Morais A, Perondi B, Harima L,
Montal  AC,  Baldassare RM, Moraes DP, et al. Overcoming barriers
to providing comprehensive inpatient  care  during  the  COVID‐19
pandemic.  Clinics.  2020;75:e2100 basis (2), the CMC was able to
implement different measures to help improve their well‐being and
adherence  to  the  hospitals  response model.  in Latin America,
with 2400 beds. This center  comprises  (ICHC),  an  eleven‐floor
multidisciplinary tertiary care facility with 900 beds, of which,
90 are in intensive care units The rapid progression of the coro‐
navirus disease (COVID19) pandemic in So Paulo and the consequent
need to adapt hospital care provision to this public health emer‐
gency  led  the  institutional  Crisis Management Committee (CMC)
COVID‐19 care, which was accomplished in 8 days.  The  subsequent
challenge  was  to  repurpose  wards that were formerly set up as
specialized inpatient care units, with 500 ward beds, into  wards
solely devoted to COVID‐19 care.  The ICHC includes medical staff
from 33 different medical specialties. To maximize the quality of
inpatient care to COVID‐19 patients, clinicians and anesthesiolo‐
gists with appropriate skills to manage critically  ill  patients
were  allocated to the ICUs and emergency department. The remain‐
ing highly specialized medical staff  (rheumatologists,  endocri‐
nologists, liver transplantation surgeons, urologists, and ortho‐
pedists, among others) were designated to care for patients in 20
regular  wards,  alongside medical residents, also recruited from
different specialties. Although motivated to take part in the in‐
stitutional  COVID‐19 response, the lack of previous consolidated
experience in emergency care, expectedly, triggered fear and dis‐
comfort  among the medical staff. In fact, for those not familiar
with the field, managing  acute  respiratory  distress  syndrome,
which  frequently required intubation and mechanical ventilation,
was unnerving (1). This issue was immediately identified, and af‐
ter  listening and staying connected to the teams on a day‐to‐day
Personal safety  Decreasing the fear of infection Health  profes‐
sionals  safety is a priority during disasters, particularly when
dealing with a contagious disease. Managing COVID‐19 patients re‐
quires  continuous  provision  of  sufficient personal protective
equipment (PPE), along with  establishment  of  clear  rules  and
guidelines  on  where,  when,  and how to use PPE, as well as its
correct donning and doffing (3). These aspects  were  managed  by
sizing  and  stocking  PPE in advance, improving the logistics of
PPE distribution to wards, maintaining written PPE‐use protocols,
and  providing structured donning and doffing training with prac‐
tical simulation.  Team organization, training, and support Over‐
coming  the discomfort associated with the lack of previous expe‐
rience in the field After years of experience in their particular
medical  field,  doctors  had  to treat patients with a condition
that is very different from that seen in their daily practice. To
overcome  the  distress associated with this, we developed a com‐
prehensive team organization, training, and support plan that  1.
A  standardized treatment protocol: This was designed by special‐
ists (infectious disease specialists and pulmonologists) and  was
included  as  part  of the training program for the medical staff
and residents before they were designated to treat  COVID‐19  pa‐
tients.  Practical guidelines and videos (when and how to request
for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2  (SARS‐CoV‐2)
testing and clear hospital discharge criteria, among others) were
made available on the hospitals website.  2.  Organizing  a  ward
medical  team: A ward medical team consisted of a leader, who was
a specialist, and 12 residents for every 25 beds. The  specialist
leaders remained in their usual ward, aiming to provide care in a
more familiar setting. Their working hours were adjusted so  that
at  least  one of the physicians would be on duty in daily shifts
(7 a.m. to 7 p.m.). Medical residents, from different specializa‐
tions,  remained in the same ward for at least one month, working
in 12‐hour shifts followed by 4.0/)  which  permits  unrestricted
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium or format, pro‐
vided the original work is properly cited.  No potential conflict
of  interest  was  reported.   on June 5, 2020 Comprehensive care
during the COVID‐19 pandemic Miethke‐Morais A et  al.   hospital.
They  could  be  accessed through a 24/7 hotline or scheduled in‐
person care appointments, whenever necessary.  In conclusion, im‐
portant  lessons  were  learned  in organizing COVID‐19 inpatient
care at Hospital das Clinicas in the context of a  public  health
emergency.  Staying  in  close contact with first responders on a
day‐to‐day basis to ask about their specific needs and to  listen
and acknowledge their requests helped strengthen staff collabora‐
tion. Moreover, it was crucial to identify the need to  implement
strategies  focused  on  mitigating  some  of the clinicians main
sources of anxiety and discomfort. This allowed proper  function‐
ing  of hospital wards, with participation of all available medi‐
cal staff in HCFMUSPs response to COVID‐19.  36  hours  of  rest;
four  of  them  worked during the day shift and two, in the night
shift.  3. 24‐hour specialist support in wards: An expert (infec‐
tious  disease, pulmonology, or internal medicine specialist) was
available as a focal supervisor to the ward medical team  at  all
times  to  provide  counseling on patient management.  During the
day, an expert was available for every two wards, and  at  night,
for every three to four wards.  4. Back up if the patients clini‐
cal condition worsened: A  rapid  response  team,  consisting  of
anesthesiologists  with  airway  management expertise, trained in
COVID‐19 airway management protocols, and equipped with difficult
airway  tools, was made available 24/7, responding in less than 3
minutes when called to any hospital area where intubation and me‐
chanical  ventilation were required. Not having to cope with this
stressful scenario alone  (4)  relieved  the  medical  staff  and
strengthened  their motivation toward being a part of and leading
ward care teams. Rapid and preferential transfer of patients in a
critical  condition to the ICU beds in operation at the transport
team.
 AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Caring for clinicians mental health  Coping
with  COVID‐19  1.  Higgs  A, McGrath BA, Goddard C, Rangasami J,
Suntharalingam G, Gale R, et al. Guidelines for the management of
tracheal  intubation  in critically 2. Dzau VJ, Kirch D, Nasca T.
Preventing a Parallel Pandemic  A National 3. Zhan M, Qin Y,  Xue
X,  Zhu  S. Death from Covid‐19 of 23 Health Care 4. Shanafelt T,
Ripp J, Trockel M. Understanding and Addressing Sources of  Anxi‐
ety  Among Health Care Professionals During the COVID‐19 Anxiety,
burnout, and other mental health conditions  are  frequent  among
healthcare  workers  aiding in disaster scenarios (4). Therefore,
it is essential to implement strategies to  safeguard  clinicians
mental  health  in these scenarios.  Thus, from the initiation of
the hospitals response to  COVID‐19,  a  team  of  mental  health
providers  (psychiatrists  and  psychologists)  was  made readily
available to support  every  healthcare  professional  or  anyone
working in the








