Behavioral  Sciences  Strategies  to deal with the COVID‐19 Paulo
NADANOVSKY(a, b) Ana Paula Pires  dos  SANTOS(c)  Fundao  Oswaldo
Cruz   Fiocruz,  Escola  Nacional de Sade Pblica, Departamento de
Epidemiologia e Mtodos Quantitativos em Sade, Rio de Janeiro, RJ,
Brazil.  Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro
 UERJ,  Instituto de Medicina Social, Departamento de Epidemiolo‐
gia, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.  Universidade do Estado  do  Rio
de Janeiro
 UERJ, Faculdade de Odontologia, Departamento de Odontologia Pre‐
ventiva e Comunitria, Rio de Janeiro,  RJ,  Brazil.   associative
interest  that  represents a conflict Paulo Nadanovsky Submitted:
May 20, 2020 Last revision: June  4,  2020  Abstract:  The  World
Health  Organization  declared  a  COVID‐19 pandemic on March 11,
2020, when there were 4,293 confirmed cumulative deaths.  By  May
17,  2020 this number increased to 315,005.  The risk of death is
higher above the age of 60, but there are many  deaths  below  60
(for example, in Sao Paulo, 25%). Due to the lack of a vaccine or
specific treatment, there are at least three types  of  interven‐
tions  used  in the first wave of this pandemic: increased alert‐
ness and hygiene (e.g. Sweden); identification and  isolation  of
infected  people  and their contacts (e.g. South Korea); lockdown
(e.g. Italy). These interventions are complementary.  Choices  of
the  right mix of interventions will vary from society to society
and in the same society at different times. The search for a mir‐
acle drug is dangerous because it is based on the mistaken belief
that any treatment option is better than nothing. Brazilian soci‐
ety  will  not  be  able  to maintain lockdown for a long period.
Naturally, in the near future, regardless of the advice from sci‐
entists,  In order to implement any strategy aimed to control the
pandemic and preserve the economy, the country  needs  leadership
that  centralizes  and  coordinates  actions.  Unfortunately, the
Brazilian government is not fulfilling this  role;  on  the  con‐
trary,  it  is  a hindrance. This negative leadership and lack of
coordination are causing many deaths and  are  severely  damaging
the  lives  of survivors by delaying the resuming of economic and
social activities.  Keywords: Coronavirus  Infections;  COVID‐19;
Pandemics;  Public  Health;  Evidence‐Based  Practice.  The World
Health Organization (WHO) declared a COVID‐19 pandemic, the  dis‐
ease  caused by the new coronavirus SARS‐CoV‐2 (Severe Acute Res‐
piratory Syndrome ‐ Coronavirus ‐ 2), on March 11, 2020,1 the day
on  which  269 new deaths were confirmed in the world (with 4,293
cumulative deaths confirmed as of  that  date).  Brazil  had  the
first  recorded death on March 17, 2020, the day on which 596 new
deaths were confirmed in the world; on May 17,  2020  Brazil  and
the  world  accumulated 16,118 and 315,005 deaths, respectively.2
The threat of COVID‐19 is revealed not only  by  the  numbers  of
people infected and deaths, but mainly by the number of suscepti‐
ble people in Braz. Oral Res.  2020;34:e068  Strategies  to  deal
with the COVID‐19 pandemic the population who may become infected
and the rate at which this occurs. SARS‐CoV‐2 is a new  virus  to
which  the human population has no immunity. The transmission oc‐
curs mainly through droplets and aerosols when the person  talks,
coughs  or  sneezes.  The incubation period is five days (median)
and ranges from two to 14 days. 3 It appears that 25% of infected
people  are asymptomatic, i.e., they do not present symptoms dur‐
ing the entire period of infection, but new and better  serologi‐
cal  surveys  can reveal different percentages. People presenting
the symptomatic forms of the disease go through a  presymptomatic
phase,  which appears to last for about four days, and may infect
other people during this phase.4,5 It seems that the  viral  load
is  highest  at the time the symptoms appear, suggesting that in‐
fectivity peaks before the symptoms appear,  which  can  lead  to
much pre‐symptomatic transmission.6 Why is each person potential‐
ly responsible for the death of others?  We are  facing  a  virus
with  relatively high or moderate transmissibility and apparently
low lethality (infection fatality ratio), although over 60  years
of  age  the  mortality among symptomatic cases is high: 60 to 69
years 4%; 70 to 79 years old 8%; over  80  years  old  15%.7  The
problem is that even a relatively low lethality, when spread over
a large number of people, leads to a large number  of  deaths  in
the  population.8  This is because there is no specific effective
treatment to cure or prevent death by COVID‐19.  Another  problem
is  that  although  SARS‐CoV‐2  often causes asymptomatic or mild
illness (cough, fever, pain, and  malaise),  a  small  proportion
will develop severe morbidity requiring specialized care, includ‐
ing respirators and intensive care unit beds. Even in the absence
of effective specific treatment, care is crucial to limit suffer‐
ing.  In other words, the probability of a healthy  person  under
the age of 60 contracting the virus and requiring hospitalization
is small. However, as there are millions of healthy people  under
the  age  of  60  in  the population, even this small probability
leads to a large number of people being admitted to hospital.  In
So  Paulo, between March 17 and April 30, 2020, 3,877 people died
with suspected or  confirmed  COVID‐19,  being  Braz.  Oral  Res.
2020;34:e068 966 under 60 (25%) and 2,911 60 or over (we used da‐
ta from Sao Paulo because it is the most reliable data in Brazil;
data until April 30 2020 because there is a delay in the register
of deaths; accessed May 17 2020).  In order to cause 966  deaths,
the  number  of  people  in this age range who were infected must
have been at least 100 times higher, i.e., 96,600, since lethali‐
ty is less than 1% in this age range. As each infected person in‐
fects on average two to three people, 96,600 infected people can,
in less than two weeks, infect 241,500 (96,600 x 2.5) new persons
and so on.9 The circulation of infected people is common, as many
are  asymptomatic  and  pre‐symptomatic.  So,  when you circulate
around the city (playing football in the park or on the beach and
socializing  with a group of friends), you can contract the virus
and, without realizing it, infect two to three people. When  your
infection has generated 100 infected people, the probability of a
person among those 100 dying by COVID‐19 is high. So, the  proba‐
bility  of 100 infected people generating a death is high, but of
one infected person (e.g. you) dying is low. That is why  staying
at home during an epidemic outbreak, where the number of infected
people is rising and there is no vaccine or effective  treatment,
is an altruistic act.10 How do we know whether the pandemic is We
must understand the importance of time (or speed) to measure  the
severity  of  the  COVID‐19 situation. The number of deaths or of
patients that need hospital intensive care may not be  extraordi‐
nary  if we use an annual time scale. However, on a daily, weekly
and possibly monthly time scale, the  severity  of  the  COVID‐19
pandemic  is  extraordinary.  There is an indicator of the trans‐
missibility potential of  an  infectious  disease  called  R0  (R
nought, or basic reproductive number), which denotes, on average,
the number of people who get infected by each infected person  in
a  population of susceptible individuals.  Similarly, there is RE
(effective reproductive number), which is the actual  transmissi‐
bility  of  the  disease during the epidemic when there is an in‐
creasing number of people with antibodies to the virus. R0 can be
understood  as  what  can  potentially occur and RE what actually
(effectively) occurs. The only difference  Nadanovsky  P,  Santos
APP  between  R0  and RE is that RE is not dependent on the whole
population being susceptible.11 R0 depends not only on  intrinsic
aspects of the virus, but also on environmental circumstances, be
they cultural (e.g.  habit of hugging, kissing, physical  contact
in  general) or housing (e.g. slums with small houses, very close
to each other and with many people living  together).   In  addi‐
tion,  home confinement and social isolation measures also influ‐
ence R0.12 In this case, R0 will vary depending on  economic  as‐
pects  (difficulty  in  adhering to the recommendation to stay at
home, as there is a need to work daily to survive; lack of access
to  piped  water) and on social aspects (little confidence formal
education making it difficult to obtain  correct  information  on
how  to  deal with this pandemic). This means that the SARS‐CoV‐2
R0 may be different in two countries or two cities  even  if  the
virus is genetically identical in those places.  The lower the R0
or RE the better, as it means  that  the  epidemic  is  spreading
less. Values of RE>1 mean that the epidemic is increasing, RE = 1
it is stabilized and RE < 1 the epidemic is decreasing.   A  more
reliable response about the spreading of the virus in Brazil will
come when serological surveys for specific  antibodies  to  SARS‐
CoV‐2 are performed periodically on representative samples of the
population. Fortunately, these studies are already being conduct‐
ed.  The first state to start was Rio Grande do Sul (RS) on April
11, 2020 and four phases with a two‐week  interval  between  them
were  planned.13  In the first phase, 4,189 people were tested on
April 11‐13 and two were positive for antibodies (IgM  and  IgG).
Two  weeks later on April 25‐27, 4,500 people were tested and six
were positive. On May 9‐11, 4,500 were tested and 10  were  posi‐
tive.  The  population  in  RS had antibodies in the first phase,
0.13% in the second and 0.22% in the third. These numbers  trans‐
lated  to  5,650 people with antibodies in RS on April 13, 15,066
on April 27 and 24,860 on of the third  survey  that,  for  every
million  inhabitants  in RS, 2,200 were infected. As at that time
there were only 248 reported cases, they concluded that for  each
case  reported  in the RS there were nine unreported the case fa‐
tality ratio in RS based on COVID‐19 with this ratio based on the
real  number  of cases estimated in the third RS survey (24,860).
As there were 105 confirmed COVID‐19 deaths in RS, the  case  fa‐
tality ratio (lethality) applying these two alternative denomina‐
tors was 4.0% and 0.42%, respectively.14 This study is being con‐
ducted in the other Brazilian states (133 cities that will repre‐
sent the dissemination of SARS‐CoV‐2 in each of  the  27  states)
and  it  was  planned to consist of three surveys (phases) on May
12, May 21 and June 7, with 33,250 participants  in  each.   Non‐
pharmacological measures to combat the pandemic Since there is no
vaccine, which would reduce the number of susceptible  people  in
the  population,  what would be the other way to reduce this num‐
ber? By allowing the infection to follow its  natural  course  so
that after a period of time the number of people who have created
antibodies reaches a sufficient proportion to achieve RE < 1. De‐
pending on the R0, there is a proportion of people in the popula‐
tion who has to develop antibodies in order to eliminate the dis‐
ease ((R0‐1)/R0). For example, if COVID‐19 R0 = 3 in Brazil, when
67% of the population has created antibodies  to  SARS‐CoV‐2,  we
can  assume  that  the  epidemic will not sustain itself and will
soon be eliminated.  To get a perspective of what this  means  in
real  life, let us look at what happened in Spain during the most
critical period of the first wave of the pandemic in  that  coun‐
try.  There,  between March 5 and May 17, 2020, there were 27,650
deaths recorded by COVID19 (the peak was in early April 2020 with
950  deaths  recorded  daily). It is estimated that, despite this
large number of deaths, only 5% of the population  has  been  in‐
fected and has produced antibodies.15 If it is necessary that 60%
of the population develop immunity in order to achieve  RE  <  1,
Spain  would have to experience what it went through at that For‐
tunately, it appears that lockdown as of March  14  substantially
reduced  the  pandemic in Spain and there was already a reduction
in the number of new deaths detected three weeks after the  start
of  the  Braz. Oral Res. 2020;34:e068 Strategies to deal with the
COVID‐19 pandemic lockdown;16 this reduction has shown itself  to
be large and consistent since then.17,18 There are at least three
types of non‐pharmacological interventions that have been used to
deal with the first wave of this pandemic: a) Increased alertness
and hygiene (e.g. Sweden); b) Identification and isolation of in‐
fected  people and their contacts (e.g. South Korea); c) Lockdown
(e.g. Italy).  A) Increased alertness and hygiene  (e.g.  Sweden)
Increased alertness and hygiene are changes in behaviour aimed at
the entire population, so that everybody is alert  to  avoid  ag‐
glomeration,  physical contact and intensify hand washing, clean‐
ing of personal objects and surfaces. It is necessary to  involve
the  whole  population,  because asymptomatic and pre‐symptomatic
people can transmit the virus for several  days  without  knowing
that they are infected. This increased alertness and hygiene were
also adopted in the places where interventions b and c above were
applied;  that  is, interventions b and c include intervention a.
There are differences within each of these three types of  inter‐
vention.  For example, it was part of the increased alertness and
hygiene in South Korea (in Asian countries generally) for  every‐
one  to  wear  a  mask  on the streets, but not in Sweden. But it
seems that avoiding crowding and intensifying  personal  hygiene,
especially  hand washing, was a measure that all countries adopt‐
ed.  If effective, this is possibly the best type of intervention
because  it  keeps  social and economic activities going and does
not spend resources in screening programs to identify and isolate
infected  people. To be effective it depends on a population with
a good level of formal education, cooperation, In addition,  this
type  of intervention depends on a competent leadership, that is,
well informed, coordinated, proactive, consistent,  firm,  objec‐
tive and clear.  It is worth warning though, that among the Scan‐
dinavian countries, Sweden has had the highest number  of  deaths
by  COVID‐19  to  date,  May 17, 2020: Sweden 3.674; Denmark 543;
Norway 232; note that it is not necessary to consider the size of
the population Braz. Oral Res. 2020;34:e068 to compare the number
of COVID‐19 deaths between countries.19 The overall  excess  mor‐
tality  during  the outbreaks in each of these countries was also
higher in Sweden: Sweden 3,000 more deaths than usual (29%); Den‐
mark  200 more deaths (6%); Norway 0 more deaths (0%).20 B) Iden‐
tification and isolation of infected persons and  their  contacts
(e.g.  South  Korea) This intervention emphasizes identifying in‐
fected people and their contacts  through  diagnostic  tests  for
virus  detection  and  their  confinement  for a period of two to
three weeks. This intervention is expensive, difficult to  imple‐
ment, and requires a major effort to recruit and train workers to
perform the tests and the population to adhere  to  the  constant
tests (which involves unpleasant procedures such as having a swab
introduced deep in the nose or the throat).  The  development  of
complex  technological  and logistical resources using, for exam‐
ple, connected mobile phone networks and  testing  points  across
the country may be necessary in order to implement efficient con‐
tact tracing and testing in large cities.21  Testing  has  to  be
carried  out  frequently  and  on a large scale. For example, one
model, possibly one of the most parsimonious,  estimated  that  5
million tests would be needed initially and then 20 million daily
for this intervention to be successful in the USA.21 In addition,
the  state  has to provide quarantine sites and financial aid for
infected people who are unable to quarantine at home. This inter‐
vention  presents ethical challenges related to the protection of
privacy, nondiscrimination (that is, avoiding  prejudice  against
infected people) and individual civil liberties.21 If well imple‐
mented, it can be reassuring (people feel  reassured  that  there
are almost no infectious people circulating between them) and ef‐
fective in keeping the virus circulation restricted. As with  al‐
ternative  a  above, this type of intervention also preserves so‐
cial and economic activities in the country.  C)  Lockdown  (e.g.
Italy)  Lockdown includes interventions such as closing trade and
services, restricting transport and closing of the entire popula‐
tion,  with  the  exception of essential Nadanovsky P, Santos APP
workers (e.g. health and food  professionals,  and  the  police).
This type of intervention is the last resort in the impossibility
(or failure) of the two previous Strategies to end  the  lockdown
Lockdown  may  be  effective in reducing the number of deaths and
severe cases of COVID‐19, but it is not  a  realistic  option  to
confine  people for many months. If economic activity becomes de‐
pressed, at the level it remains during lockdown, for more than a
few  months, the number of deaths caused by the economic downturn
may be greater than that avoided by COVID‐19.22 There  is  really
no  choice  between  protecting health or protecting the economy;
protecting the economy is a fundamental part  of  health  protec‐
tion.  Therefore,  we  must urgently create strategies to end the
lockdown. It is important to recognize that  there  are  positive
health  effects  of the lockdown, which offset, at least in part,
its negative effects, such as a reduction in deaths and hospital‐
izations due to: traffic crashes; violence; air pollution; virus‐
es in general; gastrointestinal  diseases;  unnecessary  elective
procedures  due  to overdiagnosis and overtreatment. In addition,
the such as hand washing, should reduce the circulation of virus‐
es  and microorganisms in general, reducing consequently reducing
the contagion of parents, grandparents and family members in gen‐
eral,  by  children  and  health professionals.  Brazil began the
lockdown earlier in the course of  its  outbreak  (at  least  Sao
Paulo  and  Rio  de  Janeiro) than other countries such as Italy,
Spain, the United Kingdom and the  USA.16  Therefore,  it  seemed
that  there would be fewer deaths and severe cases in Brazil than
in these countries during the first wave  of  this  pandemic.  It
seemed  plausible that the exit from the lockdown in Brazil could
occur after a smaller trauma than in these other countries.  But,
unfortunately,  it  seems  that  Brazil missed the opportunity to
learn from the countries that preceded it during the  first  wave
of  this  pandemic,  giving  signs that the number of deaths here
will be even higher than  in  the  countries  that  suffered  the
most.17  In  any  case,  the exit from the lockdown will occur at
some point and it is expected that it will be  carried  out  cau‐
tiously.  Caution  means  starting the exit only when there is an
indication of RE < 1 (on May 8, 2020, none the five most affected
Brazilian  states  seemed  to  have been able to reach RE < 1).23
When this time comes, it will be necessary to emphasize  the  in‐
vestment  in  increased alertness and hygiene like Sweden, and in
the identification and isolation of  infected  people  and  their
contacts  like  South Korea.  The identification and isolation of
infected people and their contacts may be unrealistic for Brazil.
If it has not been possible to apply this intervention so far, it
seems unlikely that it will be applied at the  time  of  relaxing
the  lockdown. This is an intervention that demands an investment
that is possibly beyond Brazils capacity at this historical,  so‐
cial  and  economic moment. If there is sufficient political will
and effort from society to apply  this  intervention  though,  it
will  reduce  the risk that in the coming months or years we will
have to resort to lockdown periodically, which causes so much so‐
cial,  psychological  and  economic harm.19 A precarious alterna‐
tive, in the absence of diagnostic tests, would be to  focus  the
identification  of infected persons among those who seek hospital
care, have COVID‐19 confirmed and their contacts.  This  is  pre‐
carious  because  it  does not identify many people with asympto‐
matic, mild and pre‐symptomatic disease (but it is better than no
surveillance  at all).  This alternative must be supported by the
government through providing sites for quarantine  and  financial
help  for  people who are unable to stay at home and stop working
during quarantine.  Epidemiologic surveys  with  rapid  serologic
antibody  tests11  are  likely to be the key tool to help us deal
with this pandemic, which could last until 2022 (and even  resur‐
face in 2025).12 These tests are likely to act as the speedometer
that will indicate the rate of virus transmission; this will help
us  accelerate and trade, exiting or starting lockdown, etc.  An‐
other role to be considered for  serological  tests  is  In  this
case,  the  objective is to identify people in the population who
are able to leave home confinement Braz. Oral  Res.  2020;34:e068
Strategies  to  deal  with the COVID‐19 pandemic and speed up the
resumption of economic and social activities. The accuracy of the
serological test for antibodies to SARS‐CoV‐2 currently in use in
Brazil the usefulness of the test depends on  the  prevalence  of
people  with  antibodies in the population. Even with a very good
specificity (99%) a positive result is more likely  to  be  false
than  true when the prevalence is 1%.  This means that for a per‐
son with a positive result, the probability of not  having  anti‐
bodies  is  greater than that of having antibodies. In possession
of such should not feel reassured, as they are more likely to  be
susceptible  than immunized.24 On the other hand, in a population
with 10% or 20% of people with antibodies, a positive  result  in
this  test shows a high probability that the person does have an‐
tibodies and is no longer at risk of becoming infected or  infec‐
tive.   These accuracy estimates are based on the aggregate popu‐
lation and ignore the clinical history that would modify pre‐test
probabilities.  Within the general population and special popula‐
tions, such as health professionals, there are  individuals  with
and  without  a  history  of  what sounds like COVID19, including
those with no history, atypical, mild, moderate  and  severe.  In
each  of these histories there is a different pre‐test probabili‐
ty, which can vary from 2 to 80%, for example. In short, the use‐
fulness  of this type of test to assist in the release of certain
individuals, that is, in  providing  immunity‐based  (or  perhaps
20%)  of people with antibodies in the reference population.24 It
has not yet been proven whether antibodies to  SARS‐CoV‐2  confer
immunity  and  if so, for how long.  Therefore, this type of test
may be irrelevant if the antibodies do  not  confer  immunity  or
confer  it  for a short period of time. For the time being, based
on studies with monkeys and evidence of other viruses in  humans,
it  is  assumed  that immunity has been acquired for at least two
years.12 In the near future, the science behind this type of test
is  expected  to be more conclusive. Assuming that antibodies are
indeed neutralizing the virus for a long time;  that  the  preva‐
lence of people with antibodies in populations is greater than 10
or 20%, Braz. Oral Res. 2020;34:e068 or that  more  accurate  new
tests  are  created,  and  reach 100% or almost 100% specificity,
that is, rarity or absence of false‐positive results; these tests
can  be  a  valuable aid to the prudent opening of society during
epidemic waves in which society  has  been  placed  under  strict
norms  of  limiting  mobility  and outside activities.  There are
ethical and practical challenges that will need to  be  addressed
by  societies  that  choose  to  issue including the following:25
stigma (discrimination) increased inequality in favour  of  those
who  can  afford  susceptible  to  fraud; errors in the test that
would lead to issuing the licence to people who should not obtain
it.  Experts  in bioethics made an excellent analogy were able to
answer convincingly all questions and  concluded  that,  although
immunity‐based  licensing  requires  care  for implementation and
solid scientific support, none of the  objections  identified  so
far  make  them  unethical  in principle.25 A strategy that would
probably be prudent, fair and efficient to speed up exiting lock‐
down is as follows: when the proportion of people with antibodies
in the general population is small (< 10%), emphasize the identi‐
fication  and isolation of the infected (frequent tests to detect
the presence of the virus).21 When this proportion  exceeds  10%,
also  emphasize  the  issuance  the  presence of antibodies.25 If
there is not  enough  political  determination  and  coordination
(competence)  or economic, social, technological or cultural con‐
ditions to promote lockdown relaxation through virus and antibody
detection  tests, the alternative will be trial and error type of
relaxation. In this case, the end of and services and the release
of  transportation may consist of the release of the entire popu‐
lation at once at a given time. Alternatively, opening can  begin
gradually,  for  example, in weekly waves, directing the lockdown
relaxation to distinct occupational groups. For example,  it  may
initially  release workers from sectors that depend most on being
away from Nadanovsky P, Santos APP home to carry out their activ‐
ities  (factory workers, construction workers, shopkeepers, etc.)
and later those who are able to carry out a large part  of  their
The  criteria  will obviously vary according to the specificities
of each city, state and country.  The trial  and  error  type  of
lockdown  relaxation is risky because a large number of suscepti‐
ble, asymptomatic, pre‐symptomatic and infective individuals  are
released  at  the  same  time, creating a social environment con‐
ducive to virus transmission, which can lead to uncontrolled epi‐
demic  and  in  a  short  time the need for new closures and even
lockdown.  The advantages are the rapid and  vigorous  resumption
of  economic  and  social activity and the faster increase in the
number of infected individuals who will produce antibodies,  con‐
tributing  to the reduction in the value of RE (all other factors
remaining constant).  If this  type  of  lockdown  relaxation  is
adopted  at  a  time when there is still much transmission of the
infection, it can cause an increase in the number of severe cases
above  what  the health services would be able to take; for exam‐
ple, as of May 8, 2020, it was estimated that the five  most  af‐
fected  Brazilian  states  had RE > 1, so, the epidemic was still
growing.23 If the number of new cases does not  cause  disruption
to the health service and a relatively small number of deaths oc‐
cur, this alternative would be a success.  However, it is hard to
believe  that  this success will be achieved when RE > 1.  In the
end, the moment of exiting lockdown will not really be a  moment;
historically,  considering  past pandemics, the end of a pandemic
is diffuse and determined not only (and perhaps  not  mainly)  by
medical  and  health considerations, but more by the social pres‐
sure of people wanting to return to normal life.  The  population
is  becoming  inpatient  and  gradually returning to normal life,
even with the health risks and the high number  of  deaths.26  It
try  to reduce the transmission of infection as much as possible,
while there is social collaboration.  It is  plausible  that  the
world  will  have  to  deal  with  the comings and goings of this
COVID‐19 pandemic in the next two to four years.12 There  may  be
critical  times  when other periods of lockdown will be necessary
if effective treatment or vaccine is not available. Therefore, it
is  important  that  we  not only in this first wave we are going
through, but also for other similar  situations  in  the  future.
Some  many  will  be  tested,  improved and adapted. For example,
starting with a system based on a twoweek time schedule  (consid‐
ering the incubation period of the virus), 10‐4, that is, 10 days
at home and 4 out.27 are alternatives that do  not  exclude  each
other.  On  the  contrary, they are complementary. The choices of
the right mix will vary from society to society and in  the  same
society  at  different times. Each of these strategies has advan‐
tages and disadvantages that  vary  primarily  according  to  the
prevalence  of  susceptible people in the population and the rate
of infection transmission. Other important variables that  should
be  considered are: available resources (diagnostic tests, places
for physical isolation, health facilities to care for severe cas‐
es);  socioeconomic  conditions  (financial  reserves  to sustain
drastic reduction in economic activity,  housing  and  sanitation
conditions,  population density); culture (discipline, confidence
and social norms, hygiene habits).   Scientific  evidence  during
the  It  is  understandable  that  in the face of a pandemic like
COVID‐19, the population, the media and health professionals  are
anxious  to  obtain information about diagnostic tests, treatment
alternatives and the prognosis of the disease. As it  is  an  un‐
known disease, series studies. The problem is that, in the eager‐
ness to obtain quick answers, these case series have been used to
gather  information  about  the effectiveness of different treat‐
ments. However, this study design is a precarious and rudimentary
way  of  evaluating the effectiveness of treatments, with serious
consequences, including the large‐scale  adoption  of  treatments
that  can  increase morbidity and risk of death.  Braz. Oral Res.
2020;34:e068  Strategies  to  deal  with  the  COVID‐19  pandemic
COVID‐19  may  be  an  unknown  disease, but its consequences are
known to doctors. For example, fever, pain, shortness of  breath,
and  the  other  symptoms related to COVID‐19 are familiar situa‐
tions that doctors are used to dealing with. The clinical manage‐
ment of various diseases, not only COVID‐19, consists of offering
palliative and supportive care. Often it is the patients own  de‐
fensive  mechanisms  that react effectively, independently of the
medical treatment received. With COVID‐19 it is no different. The
vast majority of patients react and recover from the In addition,
there are medical and pharmacological resources to help  patients
cope  with  COVID‐19,  such  as  analgesics, antipyretics, oxygen
masks, mechanical respirators; these resources can be lifesaving.
There  is  then  a  standard care to help patients with COVID‐19.
Therefore, the question we have to answer is  the  following:  do
patients  who receive a certain drug (any new drug or an existing
drug, but not yet used in patients with COVID‐19), in addition to
the  standard care, show improved prognosis of COVID‐19 (that is,
reduced risk of dying, sequelae or length of  hospital  stay)  in
comparison to patients who receive standard care only? Let us see
how case series cannot answer this question. For example, it  may
be  that the risk of dying in hospitalized patients infected with
SARS‐CoV‐2 who receive standard care is 8%. A drug,  in  addition
to  standard care, would have to reduce this risk from 8% to, for
example, 4% to be considered  effective.  Imagine  a  doctor  who
treated  100  patients  with  standard  care associated with this
drug. He noticed that only 8 that he treated  100  patients  with
the  drug and only 8 died, concluding that the drug is a success.
As there were no patients receiving only the  standard  care,  he
could  not  realize  that even without the drug the number of pa‐
tients dying would also be 8. The  lack  of  a  comparison  group
makes  the  case  series a precarious modality of study design to
discover effective treatments for COVID‐19.  As there is no known
effective treatment specific to COVID‐19, a source of information
may be the experience and feeling of the physicians when evaluat‐
ing  each  patient individually (gut Braz. Oral Res. 2020;34:e068
feeling). This lack of evidence allows the ethical use of experi‐
mental  treatments,  still without scientific proof of effective‐
ness, the so‐called compassionate use.29 This experimental situa‐
tion  should  be  made explicit and shared by the doctor with the
patient and the patients family in order to  decide  whether  the
doctor  will  only provide the standard care or associate it with
an experimental drug. The problem is that  there  are  physicians
who cannot conceive that something they believe in so much has to
be considered an experimental treatment.  The search  for  effec‐
tive treatments or preventive measures should rely on the random‐
ized controlled trial (RCT). This is the study design  that  pro‐
vides the most robust and reliable evidence. At this moment of so
much doubt and fear, the RCT should be emphasized even  more.  It
is  worth  noting that one of the frustrations usually associated
with the RCT is the long time it takes to be performed, especial‐
ly  when researchers have to follow participants for long periods
of time until the outcomes of interest  occur.  In  the  case  of
COVID‐19,  because  it  is a fast course disease, the outcomes of
interest (e.g., death, length of  stay  and  lung  damage)  occur
within  one or two months; this allows the RCT to be completed in
a relatively short time.  Better than one RCT are  all  the  RCTs
already  of  RCT provides the best answer about treatment to com‐
plete, so we have seen an increasing  number  provided  that  all
steps  are  maintained and there is no loss of quality during the
process. This is possible  automated  and  when  experienced  re‐
searchers  dedicate  their  time exclusively to this work.30 Pre‐
prints is another method for sharing scientific  evidence  during
the  COVID‐19  pandemic.  These  are Preprints in the health area
have recently gained more attention because the storage  capacity
of  the  repositories  is  much greater than that of conventional
Nadanovsky P, Santos APP available study results that can have an
immediate  impact  on  the management of the disease. Many health
policies during the pandemic are being guided by preprints.32 The
negative  side  of  the  preprint  is publication of studies with
gross methodological errors that threaten confidence in  the  re‐
sults.  The  positive  side is the rapid dissemination of results
and visibility, allowing the scientific community to  have  quick
access  to  the  study and make their critiques and contributions
openly.  An extraordinary amount of research has been carried out
recently  on several topics related to COVID‐19. While this shows
the admirable effort and vigour of the  scientific  community  to
react  quickly to seek solutions, it also reveals a lack of coor‐
dination to minimize duplication of efforts and  maximize  avail‐
able resources. For example, there are more than 1,500 records of
ongoing studies related Of these, more  than  900  are  RCTs,  of
which  more than 400 are currently recruiting participants.  Many
studies with the same hypotheses lead to a competition  for  par‐
ticipants,  besides  being a missed opportunity to test different
hypotheses.34 There are several small and isolated  RCTs  testing
the same drugs, some of which will probably not manage to recruit
enough patients to be able  to  detect  differences  between  the
groups  being compared.35 It would be better to perform multicen‐
tric, adaptive RCTs, which test a range of  potential  treatments
simultaneously  and  are  able to recruit patients with different
profiles and varied clinical conditions more quickly. An  example
of  this  type of RCT is the Recovery Trial.36 In addition, it is
important that there is a monitoring system to avoid  publication
bias.  There  are attempts to create a register that captures all
RCTs related to COVID‐19.37 There has also been much  duplication
of  effort  in conducting May 18, 2020, there were 925 records of
systematic 50 aim to evaluate the effectiveness and/or safety  of
chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine  (alone  or  combined with another
drug) in treating COVID‐19.38 The frantic search  for  a  miracle
drug is dangerous because it is based on and leads to the mistak‐
en belief that any treatment option is better than nothing, after
all, what harm can a drug do when there is no other treatment op‐
tion available? However, it is not true that there is nothing. As
argued  already,  there  is the standard care and the natural de‐
fence mechanisms of the individual against the disease.  In addi‐
tion, medications have adverse effects, often severe, and only by
carrying out an RCT is it possible to  know  whether  a  medicine
does  more  good  than harm. That is, when a drug with an unknown
clinical effect (or known, but in patients with  other  diseases)
is  administered  to  patients  with  severe  diseases,  such  as
COVID‐19, there is no way to know whether the patients have bene‐
fited  or  harmed  themselves unless they have been compared to a
control group.39 The case of chloroquine and  hydroxychlorine  is
emblematic.  One  of the main appeals of these drugs is that they
have been used for many years to treat patients with malaria, lu‐
pus,  rheumatoid  arthritis  and  other autoimmune diseases. This
would already ensure their safety. However, this is indirect evi‐
dence:  they  may  be safe for those, but harmful for COVID19 pa‐
tients. Nevertheless, in the last few  months  they  have  gained
prominence, as some physicians and researchers have begun to con‐
sider them as an option for the treatment of COVID‐19.  In  March
2020, the WHO approved studies with these drugs for the treatment
of patients with COVID‐19. World leaders were enthusiastic  about
these  drugs  and  advocated  that  they  would  be  the cure for
COVID‐19; this caused a frantic search for these drugs in pharma‐
cies,  leaving  patients  with  other  diseases without access to
them.  Promising in vitro  studies  and  preliminary  results  of
clinical studies with poor methods led to a distorted view of re‐
ality, causing many physicians, the media and the  population  to
believe  in  this miracle drug.  There are several reports on so‐
cial networks of people claiming that they  have  been  saved  by
chloroquine  or  hydroxychloroquine. Obviously, no individual can
know whether or not he was saved by some treatment, because it is
not  possible to know whether he would have survived or recovered
in the absence of the treatment.  Braz.  Oral  Res.  2020;34:e068
Strategies  to  deal with the COVID‐19 pandemic This unscientific
atmosphere, fostered by some political  leaders,  physicians  and
researchers,  makes  the execution of RCTs difficult. People hear
in the media that chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine  are  effec‐
tive and safe. Thus, patients and family members may not agree to
participate in studies where they will be randomly allocated  ei‐
ther  to  chloroquine/  hydroxychloroquine,  or another drug or a
placebo.40 Who will agree to receive another drug  or  a  placebo
when  an  effective  and  safe drug is available?  Unfortunately,
many of the studies conducted on COVID‐19 used poor methods,  in‐
cluding those that aimed to evaluate the effectiveness of chloro‐
quine and resources. 41 Several clinical studies  were  conducted
without  a control group. There was also a comparison with a his‐
torical control group, not internal to the study, which eliminat‐
ed the crucial role of randomization.42 In many studies there was
also no blinding of the assessment of the outcome, and often  the
outcomes used were subjective, such as improvement of symptoms or
radiological imaging35.  safety of hydroxychloroquine and chloro‐
quine  for  COVID‐1943 included, so far, 120 comparative clinical
studies, but 109 are still ongoing, so the results  refer  to  11
studies  with available data: three randomized open clinical tri‐
als (China), one  non‐randomized  clinical  trial  (France),  one
prospective  cohort  (China)  and  six retrospective cohort (USA,
United Arab Emirates, China and multinational). All studies  pre‐
sented  limited methodological quality and were heterogeneous re‐
garding several aspects, such as  study  design  (randomized  and
non‐randomized), outcomes (negative viral load, radiological pro‐
gression, time for clinical improvement, need for mechanical ven‐
tilation,  intensive  care unit lengths of stay, adverse effects,
mortality), severity of disease (mild or critical); dose  of  hy‐
droxychloroquine (200, 400 and 600 mg/day); method of data analy‐
sis (intention to treat and per The results of these studies  are
somewhat  controversial  and the risk of bias is high, which com‐
promises the confidence in the results. Therefore,  the  efficacy
and safety of hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine in patients with
COVID‐19 are still uncertain and we Braz. Oral Res.  2020;34:e068
should wait for the results of ongoing randomized clinical trials
for a better understanding of the effects of  this  drug  in  pa‐
tients  with  COVID‐19.   Given  the  emergency situation and the
search for effective treatments, other drugs used for other  dis‐
eases  have been studied and identified as possible treatment al‐
ternatives for COVID‐19, among them  remdesivir,  ivermectin  and
heparins. However, so far, there is not enough evidence to estab‐
lish the real harms and benefits of these drugs for the treatment
of  COVID‐19.44,45,46  There are many studies in progress and, as
new evidence becomes available, recommendations  on  the  use  of
these  drugs  for  the treatment of COVID‐19 may change.  At this
time of crisis, world leaders, public health kinds of media  must
be  careful to seek and disseminate reliable information in order
not to support the use of therapies  of  unproven  effectiveness.
Their  claims  influence  the belief and behaviour of the popula‐
tion, leading, for example, to an increase in  internet  searches
for purchasing these unproven drugs.47 In the absence of evidence
of effectiveness and safety of a drug, standard treatment may  be
the  best option. We must be careful not to fall into the tempta‐
tion to give in to obscurantism and weaken science.  However,  as
we  have  already pointed out, there are two perspectives that we
must accommodate: the individual case of each doctor‐patient dyad
and  public  policy.  On the one hand, doctors may face difficult
clinical situations where the patient is getting sicker  and  she
feels  that she should try a specific medication beyond the stan‐
dard care. In such cases, with the  consent  of  the  family  and
awareness  of the uncertainties regarding effectiveness and safe‐
ty, the doctor could prescribe these medications as  a  last  re‐
sort.  On  the  other hand, it is irresponsible to adopt a public
policy for the prescription of any drug without  proven  benefits
and  safety  from  RCTs.  In addition to the extensive search for
treatment for COVID‐19, many researchers are seeking an effective
vaccine.  There are more than 100 vaccines being developed.48 In‐
ternational scientific leaders and experts in infectious  disease
epidemiology  believe  Nadanovsky P, Santos APP that the only way
to get back to normal life will be when an effective  vaccine  is
available  for the entire world population.12 The production of a
vaccine is a time‐consuming process and obtaining a vaccine with‐
in a period of one to two years would be unprecedented. The safe‐
ty of the vaccine is a crucial aspect to be  investigated  as  it
could make subsequent infection with SARSCoV‐2 more severe.49 The
Human Challenge Studies may accelerate this process, as they  re‐
quire fewer participants and shorter follow‐up time than the usu‐
al effectiveness and safety studies. In these  studies,  partici‐
pants  get  infected on purpose in a controlled experimental set‐
ting, rather than waiting for the infection to  occur  naturally.
Volunteers are young, healthy and living in areas where the virus
is circulating. They would be monitored and receive treatment  if
they became ill. The two main limitations of this proposal are a)
obtaining evidence of effectiveness in a  specific  group  (young
and  healthy)  other  than  the group most in need of the vaccine
(elderly and chronically ill); and b) the  risk  of  death  of  a
healthy  volunteer,  even  if  small, since there is no effective
treatment for the disease. Still, there are compelling  arguments
that  make this proposal feasible and promising.50 The wearing of
masks by the entire population is controversial. Its use  is  de‐
fended  by  the precautionary principle, which says that in cases
of serious or irreversible threats to health or ecosystems,  rec‐
ognizing  that there is scientific uncertainty should not be used
as a reason to postpone preventive measures.51 If on the one hand
there is a lack of robust evidence from RCT, on the other hand we
are facing a highly transmissible disease, against which we  have
no  immunity  and  which is causing deaths and collapse in health
systems. The logic would be that the mask would protect the  oth‐
er, because the user would not expel contaminated droplets if she
were an asymptomatic (or symptomatic) carrier. However, it can be
argued that it would also protect the user, as it would be a bar‐
rier preventing contaminated droplets from the other reaching the
users  mouth  and  nose. Due to the lack of evidence, researchers
questioned the benefit and warned about the possible adverse  ef‐
fects related to the wearing of masks by the general public, such
as its misuse and the false sense of security. Mask wearing could
lead  to relaxation (or devaluation) of other preventive methods,
such as social distancing and hand washing. 52 Those who argue in
favour  remind  that  no RCT has been performed to assess the ef‐
fects of lockdown or hand washing  either.   Possibly,  the  best
justification in favour of wearing a mask, even in the absence of
evidence from RCT, would be the low potential for  harm,  as  op‐
posed  to  taking drugs without evidence from RCT, which has high
potential for harm. However, it is intriguing and frustrating  to
notice  the  enormous amount of registered RCTs for testing drugs
compared to the minimum  amount  for  evaluating  the  effect  of
masks,  a  simple  and inexpensive intervention.53,54 In order to
implement any strategy aimed to control the pandemic and preserve
the  economy,  the  country needs leadership that centralizes and
coordinates actions. Unfortunately, the Brazilian  government  is
not  fulfilling  this  role;  on the contrary, it is a hindrance.
This negative leadership and lack  of  coordination  are  causing
many  deaths  and are severely damaging the lives of survivors by
delaying the resuming of economic and social activities.  At this
moment  it is not possible to predict when the first wave of this
pandemic will be under control in Brazil, what (and how) economic
and  social  activities will be compatible with pandemic control,
and when (and if) there will be  specific  effective  vaccine  or
Brazilian society will not be able to maintain the lockdown for a
long period. Naturally, in the near future, regardless of the ad‐
vice from scientists, doctors reopen. A lack of a responsible and
proactive central leadership in consonance with the  best  scien‐
tific  evidence,  increases the risk of a tragedy in the near fu‐
ture. Unless we take urgent action, there may be an economic  de‐
bacle,  social  unrest and a slaughter never witnessed by current
generations.  Braz. Oral Res.  2020;34:e068  Strategies  to  deal
with  the COVID‐19 pandemic 1. World Health Organization. WHO Di‐
rector‐Generals opening remarks at the media briefing on COVID‐19
‐  11  March  2020.  2020 Mar 4. Kimball A, Hatfield KM, Arons M,
James A, Taylor J, Spicer K, et  al.  Asymptomatic  and  presymp‐
tomatic  SARS‐CoV‐2  infections  in residents of a long‐term care
skilled nursing facility ‐ King County, Washington,  March  2020.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2020 Apr;69(13):377‐81.  5. Wei WE, Li
Z, Chiew CJ, Yong SE, Toh MP, Lee VJ. Presymptomatic transmission
of  SARS‐CoV‐2  ‐ Singapore, January 23‐March 16, 2020. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2020 Apr;69(14):411‐5.  6. Wolfel R, Corman  VM,
Guggemos  W,  Seilmaier M, Zange S, Muller MA, et al. Virological
assessment of hospitalized patients with 12. Kissler SM, Tedijan‐
to  C, Goldstein E, Grad YH, Lipsitch M. Projecting the transmis‐
sion dynamics of SARS‐CoV‐2 through the 13. Hallal PC, Horta  BL,
Barros  AJD,  Dellagostin  OA,  Hartwig  FP,  Pellanda LC, et al.
Evoluo da prevalncia de infeco por COVID‐19 no 14. Estado do  Rio
Grande do Sul. Secretaria de Planejamento, Oramento e Gesto. Epi‐
covid19. Epidemiologia da COVID‐19 no Rio 16. Nadanovsky P. Nmero
dirio  registrado de novas mortes pela COVID‐19 nas trs primeiras
semanas aps a primeira morte registrada 18. Nadanovsky P. Por que
o  Brasil, mesmo depois de mais de quatro semanas de confinamento
domiciliar, ainda apresenta aumento no 19. Nadanovsky P. Est  er‐
rado  comparar  o  nmero  de mortes pela COVID‐19 entre pases sem
considerar o tamanho da populao em cada 22. Thomas P. J‐value as‐
sessment  of  how best to combat Covid‐19. Nanotechnology Percep‐
tions. 2020;16:16‐40.  23. Mellan TA, Hoeltgebaum HH,  Mishra  S,
Whittaker C, Schnekenberg RP, Gandy A, et al. Report 21: Estimat‐
ing COVID‐19 cases and Braz. Oral Res. 2020;34:e068 Nadanovsky P,
Santos  APP 27. Alon U, Milo R, Yashiv E. 10‐4: How to reopen the
economy by exploiting the Coronaviruss weak spot.  2020  May  11.
Available from: 28. Wu Z, McGoogan JM. Characteristics of and Im‐
portant lessons from the Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‐19) out‐
break in China: summary of a report of 72 314 cases from the Chi‐
nese  center  for   disease   control   and   prevention.   JAMA.
2020;323(13):1239‐1242.   31.  Kupferschmidt  K.  Preprints bring
firehose of outbreak data.  Science.  2020;367(6481):963‐4.   32.
Majumder MS, Mandl KD. Early in the epidemic: impact of preprints
on global discourse about COVID‐19 transmissibility. Lancet  Glob
35.  Bauchner  H,  Fontanarosa PB. Randomized clinical trials and
COVID‐19: managing expectations. JAMA. 2020 May 4.  37.  Thorlund
K, Dorn L, Park H, Hsu G, Forrest JI, Mills EJ. A real‐time dash‐
board of clinical trials for COVID‐19. Lancet Digital Health 2020
39. Kalil AC. Treating COVID‐19 ‐ Off‐Label Drug Use, Compassion‐
ate Use, and Randomized Clinical Trials During  Pandemics.  JAMA.
40. Ledford H. Chloroquine hype is derailing the search for coro‐
navirus treatments. Nature. 2020 APR;580(7805):573.  41.  Alexan‐
der  PE,  Debono  VB, Mammen MJ, Iorio A, Aryal K, Deng D, et al.
COVID‐19 research has overall low methodological quality thus 42.
Borba  MGS, Val FFA, Sampaio VS, Alexandre MAA, Melo GC, Brito M,
et al. Effect of high vs low doses of chloroquine diphosphate  as
adjunctive  therapy  for  patients hospitalized with severe acute
respiratory syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS‐CoV‐2) infection: a ran‐
domized 43. Pacheco RL, Pachito DV, Bagattini AM, Oliveira Junior
H, Riera R. Hidroxicloroquina e cloroquina para COVID‐19:  reviso
sistemtica 44. Pan American Health Organization. World Health Or‐
ganization. Ongoing living update of potential COVID‐19 therapeu‐
tics:  summary of 45. Riera R, Bagattini AM, Pachito DV, Medeiros
FC, Brito GV, Matuoka JY, et al. Heparinas para infeco por  SARS‐
CoV‐2  (COVID‐19): 46. Riera R, Pacheco RL, Latorraca COC, Fontes
LE, Martimbianco  ALC.  Remdesivir  para  infeco  por  SARS‐CoV‐2
(COVID‐19). Reviso 47. Liu M, Caputi TL, Dredze M, Kesselheim AS,
Ayers JW. Internet searches for unproven  COVID‐19  therapies  in
the  United  States. JAMA 50. Eyal N, Lipsitch M, Smith PG. Human
challenge studies to accelerate Coronavirus vaccine licensure.  J
Infect  Dis. 2020;221(11):1752‐6.  Geneva: World Health Organiza‐
tion; 2004.  52. Cheng KK, Lam TH, Leung CC. Wearing  face  masks
in the community during the COVID‐19 pandemic: altruism and soli‐
darity. Lancet.   53.  Greenhalgh  T,  Schmid  MB,  Czypionka  T,
Bassler D, Gruer L. Face masks for the public during the Covid‐19
crisis.  BMJ.  2020;369:m1435.   Braz.  Oral  Res.   2020;34:e068
Strategies  to  deal  with  the COVID‐19 pandemic. Braz Oral Res.
2020;34:e068.  Where is read: Paulo NADANOVSKY(a) Ana Paula Pires
dos  SANTOS(a)  Universidade  do  Estado do Rio de Janeiro  UERJ,
Faculdade de Departamento de Odontologia Preventiva e Comunitria,
Rio   de   Janeiro,   RJ,   Brasil.    It   should   read:  Paulo
NADANOVSKY(a,b) Ana Paula Pires dos SANTOS(c) Fundao Oswaldo Cruz
Fiocruz, Escola Nacional de Sade Pblica, Departamento de Epidemi‐
ologia e Mtodos  Quantitativos  em  Sade,  Rio  de  Janeiro,  RJ,
Brazil.  Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro  UERJ, Institu‐
to de Medicina Social,  Departamento  de  Epidemiologia,  Rio  de
Janeiro,  RJ,  Brazil.   Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro
UERJ, Faculdade de Odontologia, Departamento de Odontologia  Pre‐
ventiva  e  Comunitria,  Rio  de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.  Braz. Oral
Res. 2020;34:e068err










































