COMUNICAO   BREVE  BRIEF  COMMUNICATION  Caring  in  the  age  of
COVID‐19: lessons from science and society Cuidar  em  tempos  da
COVID‐19:  lies aprendidas entre a cincia e a sociedade Cuidar en
tiempos del COVID‐19: lecciones aprendidas entre la ciencia y  la
sociedad  Claudia  Teresa Vieira de Souza 1 Clarice Silva de San‐
tana 1 Patrcia Ferreira 2 Joo Arriscado Nunes 2 Maria de  Lourdes
Benamor  Teixeira 1 Maria Isabel Fragoso da Silveira Gouva 1 This
paper focuses on our research and intervention in  health  promo‐
tion with patients and communities affected by various infectious
diseases, in the Foundation, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, and promotes
the  continuing involvement of health researchers and profession‐
als in the collaborative production of knowledge on  health  with
patients  and community groups and in their training as community
health promoters. The new epidemic scenario  created  the  demand
for  a  space of dialogue and knowledge‐sharing on the prevention
of COVID‐19 transmission. Due to the interruption of regular  ac‐
tivities  in  the  Knowledge‐Sharing  Platform,  a  strategy  was
launched to serve as a link between science and society and  help
overcome  the  social isolation imposed by the COVID‐19 pandemic.
The WhatsApp group allowed project members to participate by  ad‐
dressing  questions (audio) on COVID‐19 through mediation by com‐
munity group leaders. The main questions by participants  related
to risk factors, transmission, immunity to the novel coronavirus,
care related to prevention, symptoms, and treatment; and COVID‐19
and  influenza  vaccine.   The educational material Caring in the
Age of COVID‐19 was produced and shared  with  community  leaders
and  distributed  to  the  respective  groups  and was eventually
shared in their communities as a response to a demand for  knowl‐
edge  that  responds to the concerns of people already exposed to
structural vulnerability.  C. T. V. Souza  Fundao  Oswaldo  Cruz.
Av.  Brasil  4365,  Rio de Janeiro, RJ 21040‐900, Brasil.  Fundao
Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil.  Centro de Estudos Sociais,
Universidade  de  Coimbra, Coimbra, Citizen Participation in Sci‐
ence and Technology; Health Promotion; Social Isolation; COVID‐19
any medium, without restrictions, as long as the original work is
correctly Cad. Sade Pblica 2020; 36(6):e00115020 Souza CTV et al.
In keeping with international guidelines, the preventive measures
recommended by the  Brazilian  Ministry  of  Health  to  minimize
COVID‐19  transmission  in places with community transmission in‐
clude social distancing 1,2.  Given the exposure to the  risk  of
contagion  and  the  incapacity to access preventive measures in‐
volving other health problems, which can thus be aggravated, sit‐
uations of structural vulnerability 3 may be expanded in the con‐
text of the COVID‐19 pandemic. It is thus important to act on the
links  between  scientific  knowledge  related  to  prevention of
transmission in the more vulnerable communities and the  continu‐
ity  of  promotion  of  their  quality of life. Aspects involving
health literacy and the  basic  sanitation,  running  water,  and
healthcare  in  poor  communities, thus require urgent attention,
integrated into the promotion of relations between individual and
community  care  to  confront  this  epidemics  challenges.   The
project Knowledge‐Sharing  Platform:  Community  Involvement  and
Participation  in  Innovative  Practices  in Health Promotion and
Knowledge Production has been developed since  2012  by  the  Re‐
search  Laboratory  in  Epidemiology  and Social Determination of
Health (LAP‐EPIDSS) at the National The project  seeks  to  build
new  practices  in  health  promotion  and forms of collaborative
knowledge production  involving  epidemiologists,  social  scien‐
tists,  infectious  disease  experts, other health professionals,
patients, and members of community groups, developing  public‐in‐
terest  health actions, allowing active participation by society,
especially in the control of infectious diseases (e.g.,  HIV  in‐
fection, Chagas disease, etc.), chronic and degenerative diseases
(e.g., neoplasms), and other health and  health‐related  problems
that impact the populations quality of life. The principal activ‐
ities involve educational talks on topics of interest to the par‐
ticipants,  visits  to scientific installations, incomegeneration
workshops, and extension courses  focused  on  relations  between
science and society in teaching, research, and clinical care set‐
tings.  The social partners of the Knowledge‐Sharing Platform in‐
clude  the  Association of Friends of the INI Struggling for Life
(ALCA‐INI), which provides support for patients receiving  treat‐
ment  for  infectious diseases at the INI and their families, the
Amigas da Mama Club (CAM), a group of women living  with  or  who
have  lived with breast cancer and that encourages a support net‐
work for confronting the disease; and the Community Advisory Com‐
mittee  of  the  Clinical Research Center in HIV/AIDS of the Nova
Iguau General Hospital (CCA‐HGNI), which  provides  an  interface
between  researchers and the community in HIV/AIDS prevention and
treatment. These three groups participate actively in publicizing
the  projects  activities.  The projects participants are already
living in situations of structural vulnerability 3, aggravated by
social  exclusion,  difficulties in access to healthcare for sur‐
veillance and control of other health problems, and daily  strug‐
gles against health inequalities and which the collective activi‐
ties promoted by the project seek to support. Most of the partic‐
ipants  see  their  vulnerability  exacerbated by COVID‐19, since
they have other infectious diseases and/or chronic  noncommunica‐
ble  diseases.   Within  the  projects  activities, the community
groups demand access to scientific knowledge  related  to  situa‐
tions  and  processes  that can seriously affect or contribute to
the exacerbation of their health condition and that of the people
living  and  in  contact with them. This community action fosters
involvement by the projects researchers with experiences pursuing
better  health  conditions  based on horizontal relations and fo‐
cused on the communitys concerns and problems related  to  health
and  quality  of life. In this context, both the community groups
and researchers informally grasp the  role  of  community  health
promoters.   The most recent community demand has been for knowl‐
edge on COVID‐19, given the participants concern over the  circu‐
lation  of  fake  news. To respond to this demand, we organized a
chat circle entitled Contributions by Community Health  Promoters
to  the  Prevention  and Control of COVID‐19, scheduled for March
19, 2020, with participation by epidemiologists, infectious  dis‐
ease experts, and specialists in hospital infection, aimed at in‐
volving the community in the shared construction of knowledge  on
the  pandemic.   Cad. Sade Pblica 2020; 36(6):e00115020 CARING IN
THE AGE OF COVID‐19 the implementation  of  measures  during  the
public  health  emergency of international concern resulting from
COVID‐19, including social isolation  in  the  state  of  Rio  de
Janeiro  as  a  way  of decreasing community transmission 4, made
cancellation of the event unavoidable due  to  the  concern  with
distancing  and  isolation  of  the  projects  participants.  The
projects focus on individuals that are already vulnerable due  to
the  undervaluation  of their experiences and knowledge led us to
create a space for action and response to situations  of  illness
and  vulnerability  and  demands for various forms of care during
the epidemic 5. Given the  social  isolation,  the  relations  of
trust and care built through health promotion activities motivat‐
ed us to adopt WhatsApp as a communications tool for collectively
dealing  with  the  challenges,  keeping  the projects activities
alive, now in a virtual environment.  The current paper  aims  to
share and present the building of this space for dialogue and ex‐
change of experiences for building knowledge  on  COVID‐19  in  a
virtual  environment  already familiar to the participants in the
projects scope and/or in their personal relations.  The paper re‐
ports  on the experience with a health activity based on the col‐
lective construction of an educational tool to contribute to  the
prevention and management of COVID‐19.  We have attempted to val‐
ue the shared questions, responding with the  group  to  the  new
challenges. We adopted WhatsApp as the platform for participatory
construction, aimed at promoting individual empowerment,  collec‐
tive  participation  by  the projects stakeholders, and community
engagement based on the use of participatory methodologies 6,7,8.
The  WhatsApp  group called Caring to Avoid COVID‐19 aimed to de‐
velop the activity with  the  LAP‐EPIDSS  team  and  3  community
groups  (ALCA‐INI,  CAM,  and  CCA‐HGNI) as mediators between the
project and the groups members. We chose this app since it is the
virtual media most widely used by these social groups to communi‐
cate with their members.  We defined leaders as people that  par‐
ticipate  in and are dedicated to their community groups, inspir‐
ing trust and offering  individualized  attention  and  care  and
seeking  solutions  with  their community members. A proposal was
thus presented to the 4 community  leaders  (LGC  in  portuguese)
project  participants to collectively develop educational materi‐
als on COVID‐19, with WhatsApp as the platform. Since the  commu‐
nity  groups  represented by their LGC have a WhatsApp group, the
proposal was for them to share the following question with  their
groups  participants:  What information on the new coronavirus do
you consider important to share with the community?.  The  survey
ran  from March 23 to 26, 2020. We included in the WhatsApp group
a message with the proposals underlying question and an audio  to
explain  the  activitys  proposal  to the LGC participants in the
Knowledge‐Sharing Platform, as a way to promote access and under‐
standing for everyone The WhatsApp group Caring to Avoid COVID‐19
was created on March 23, 2020. It consists of 5 members from  the
Knowledge‐Sharing  Platform  team and 4 LGC from community groups
that participate directly in the projects activities. Two leaders
from  ALCA‐INI  also participated. Everyone agreed to participate
and confirmed that the initiative was a way to feel that they be‐
longed  and  were  valued in the process of producing and sharing
knowledge on COVID‐19.  The participants main questions  involved
risk  factors,  transmission, immunity to the new virus, care re‐
lated to prevention, symptoms, and treatment,  and  COVID‐19  and
influenza  vaccine.  Cad. Sade Pblica 2020; 36(6):e00115020 Souza
CTV et al.  After compiling the questions raised by  each  groups
participants, the team prepared the answers based on the websites
of the World Health Organization, U.S. Centers for  Disease  Con‐
trol  and  Prevention,  Brazilian Society of Infectious Diseases,
and Ministry of Health.  Since it was urgent to provide feedback,
the consolidation and layout of the material Caring in the Age of
COVID‐19 were shared with the LGC from the participating communi‐
ty  groups.  Following  revision and evaluation by the LGC, espe‐
cially concerning the content, language, and display, the materi‐
al  was  approved and distributed by the leaders to their respec‐
tive community groups, totaling approximately 100 people who  had
access  to  it. Some LGC also shared the material in other states
of Brazil (Pernambuco, Bahia, Esprito Santo, and So Paulo).  Mem‐
bers  of  the  project  team  also asked to share the material in
their work groups (health and teaching institutions), in addition
to  groups  of  We  believe that the material reached more people
than initially estimated, which has been a common  experience  in
the  project.  The  material  was  deposited in the Institutional
Repository of the The Knowledge‐Sharing Platform has a long track
record  of  action‐based research focused on collaborative knowl‐
edge production in clinical, epidemiological, and social research
in  infectious  diseases and in the creation of innovative health
promotion. The platform is also a space to join and  build  rela‐
tions of trust and care through health promotion activities.  So‐
cial distancing and isolation are necessary  measures,  but  they
concern  us  because isolation and social exclusion are a central
part of the structural vulnerability 3 affecting the participants
(and  their communities). Based on dialogue and exchange of expe‐
riences in a virtual setting, we  thus  built  this  strategy  to
overcome  the  distancing  between  the projects participants and
support the demands for knowledge on dealing with COVID‐19.   The
initiative  had  not  been planned initially in the activities of
the Knowledge‐Sharing Platform, but it emerged as a  response  to
the need for an immediate intervention due to the characteristics
of The WhatsApp group Caring to Avoid COVID‐19 served as a  space
for  dialogue  and knowledgesharing in COVID‐19 prevention, mobi‐
lizing all the stakeholders in this participatory process. As  we
hoped,  the  individual reports shared through the projects soli‐
darity network have allowed attenuating the social isolation  ex‐
perienced  by  many participants and have continued to strengthen
the relations as a form of care. The  Knowledge‐Sharing  Platform
views  caring  as  kind of relationship and an ethnical stance in
research and intervention that highlight the relevance  of  atti‐
tudes and moral values, affective relations, and our responsibil‐
ity to involvement, understanding, and respect for vulnerable in‐
dividuals  and  communities 9,10.  The new view of care problema‐
tizes and seeks to contribute to social transformation of  health
professionals  role 11 and all the participants relations through
new experiences with caring for other  under  exceptional  condi‐
tions.  Dialogue, creativity, and attentive listening to partici‐
pants demands for promoting this form of  care,  which  expresses
the  way health is viewed by the project, is inherent to planning
the proposed activities. This experience reconfirms our view that
health  promotion requires mutual promotion of caring with empow‐
erment and well‐being. The production of such care contributes to
the  survival  and  flourishing of caregivers and those receiving
the care and to the acknowledgement of interdependence as a  con‐
dition  for  life  with  dignity.   Given the urgent need for new
forms of intervention in the COVID‐19 epidemic, we  believe  that
this experience can expand the scope of future public health mea‐
sures based on scientific commitment to the struggles for  health
by  these  communities and the communities strengthening that re‐
sults from this involvement. This strength is  expressed  in  the
solidarity  of the community health promoters, working to control
transmission of the disease in their communities, but also  as  a
lesson  and a process in the production of new forms of knowledge
and skills, expanded in their experience and dialogue with health
researchers  and  professionals  12,13.   Cad.  Sade Pblica 2020;
36(6):e00115020 CARING IN THE AGE OF COVID‐19  We  conclude  that
the  complex social and political dimensions of the COVID‐19 pan‐
demic must be addressed as part of this expanded construction  of
health  promotion  and public health.  We intend to continue this
experience as a space for dialogue and construction of  knowledge
and care, based on prevention and health promotion, since it rep‐
resents our ethical position and commitment to those experiencing
this epidemic.  This brief paper also serves to reflect on a view
of the new processes of social determination of  health  and  the
production  of new knowledge resulting from the interface between
scientific knowledge and knowledge born from experience during  a
health emergency.  C. T. V. Souza, C. S. Santana, and P. Ferreira
contributed to the studys conception and design, data collection,
analysis,  and interpretation, drafting and relevant critical re‐
vision of the intellectual content, and  approval  of  the  final
version, guaranteeing its accuracy and integrity. J. A. Nunes, M.
L. B. Teixeira, and M. I. F. S. Gouva  contributed  to  the  data
collection,  analysis,  and interpretation, drafting and relevant
critical revision of the intellectual content,  and  approval  of
the  final version, guaranteeing its accuracy and integrity.  the
study, Marcos Maurcio Braga Cardozo, Valdinei  da  Silva,  Joelma
Arajo  Tavares Ali, Juciara Nicomedio, and the other participants
in  the  project  Knowledge‐Sharing  Platform,  as  well  as  the
projects  team  members,  Jos  Liporage Teixeira (pharmacist) and
Aline Fabrcia Santos da Silva Bistene, Ana  Carolina  de  Freitas
Guimares,   and   Karina   Diniz  Pinto  Additional  informations
(0000‐0002‐6896‐0089); Maria Isabel  Fragoso  da  Silveira  Gouva
(0000‐0002‐1772‐1942).   Cad.  Sade  Pblica 2020; 36(6):e00115020
Souza CTV et al.  Secretaria de Ateno Primria  Sade, Ministrio da
Sade.   Protocolo   de  manejo  clnico  virus‐2019  (accessed  on
29/Apr/2020).  Bourgois P, Holmes SM, Sue K, Quesada J.   Strutu‐
ral  vulnerability: operationalizing the concept to adress health
disparities in clinical care. Acad Med 2017; 3:299‐307.   Rio  de
Janeiro.  Decreto  no  46.973, de 16 de maro de 2020. Reconhece a
situao de emergncia na sade pblica do Estado do Rio de Janeiro em
razo  do  contgio  e  adota  medidas de enfrentamento da propagao
decorrente do novo coronavrus (COVID‐19); e d outras providncias.
Dirio Oficial do Estado do Rio de Janeiro 2020; 17 mar.  Ferreira
P, Souza CTV, Santana CS, Nunes JA. Caring in times of  COVID‐19.
Somatosphere: Science, Medicine, and Anthropology Lima ICV, Galvo
MTG, Pedrosa SC, Cunha GH, Costa AKB. Uso do aplicativo  Whatsapp
no acompanhamento em sade de pessoas com HIV: uma anlise temtica.
Esc Anna Nery Rev Cad. Sade Pblica  2020;  36(6):e00115020  Silva
RC.  Metodologias participativas para trabalhos de promoo de sade
e cidadania. So Paulo:  Vetor;  2002.   Queiroz  AG,  Couto  ACP.
Metodologia participativa, subjetividade individual e social: fa‐
cilitao de reunies de moradores em Residncias Teraputicas. Pesqui
Prt Psicossociais Waldow VR. Cuidar: expresso humanizadora Waldow
VR. Enfermagem: a prtica do cuidado sob o ponto de vista filosfi‐
co.  Investigacin  en Enfermera: Imagen y Desarrollo 2015; Barros
S,  Oliveira  MAF,  Silva   ALA.   Prticas   Enferm   USP   2007;
41(Esp):815‐9.   Lima  FA, Galimbertti PA. Sentidos da participao
social na sade para lideranas comunitrias e profissionais da  Es‐
tratgia Sade da Famlia do territrio de Vila Unio, em Sobral
 CE. Physis (Rio J.) 2016; 26:157‐75.  Santos BS. O fim do imprio
cognitivo. Belo CARING IN THE  AGE  OF  COVID‐19  Esta  comunicao
centrada  na nossa pesquisa e interveno em promoo da sade com pa‐
cientes e comunidades afetadas por diversas  doenas  infecciosas,
no  projeto  Plataforma de Saberes. Esse projeto  desenvolvido no
Instituto Nacional de Infectologia Evandro Chagas, Fundao Oswaldo
Cruz, no Rio de Janeiro, Brasil, e promove o envolvimento contin‐
uado de pesquisadores e profissionais de sade na produo colabora‐
tiva  de  conhecimento  sobre sade com pacientes e grupos comuni‐
trios, e na sua capacitao como  promotores  de  sade  comunitria.
Face  ao  novo  cenrio  epidmico, surgiu a demanda de um espao de
dilogo e partilha de conhecimento sobre preveno da transmisso  da
COVID‐19. Devido  interrupo das atividades regulares do Platafor‐
ma de Saberes, foi promovida uma estratgia que  servisse  de  elo
integrador entre cincia e sociedade e ajudasse a superar o isola‐
mento social imposto pela pandemia da COVID‐19. O grupo de  What‐
sApp  possibilitou  aos  integrantes  do projeto participarem por
meio de formulao de perguntas (udio) sobre a COVID‐19, por inter‐
mdio  da  mediao  dos lderes de grupos comunitrios. Os principais
questionamentos dos participantes esto relacionados  com  fatores
de  risco; formas de transmisso; imunidade ao novo vrus; cuidados
relacionados  preveno, sintomas e tratamento; COVID‐19  e  vacina
da  influenza.  O material educativo Cuidar em tempos da COVID‐19
foi  produzido  e  compartilhado  com  os  lderes  comunitrios  e
disponibilizado  aos respectivos grupos, e veio a ser disseminado
nas suas comunidades como resposta a uma demanda de  conhecimento
que  responde  s  preocupaes  vividas pelos que j se encontram em
situao de vulnerabilidade estrutural.  Esta comunicacin se centra
en  nuestra investigacin e intervencin en la promocin de la salud
con pacientes y comunidades afectadas por  diversas  enfermedades
infecciosas,  en el proyecto Plataforma de Saberes. Este proyecto
est desarrollado en el Instituto Nacional de Infectologa  Evandro
Chagas/Fundacin  Oswaldo  Cruz,  en Ro de Janeiro, Brasil, y pro‐
mueve la implicacin continuada de investigadores y  profesionales
de salud en la produccin colaborativa de conocimiento sobre salud
con pacientes y grupos comunitarios, y  en  su  capacitacin  como
promotores  de salud comunitaria. Frente al nuevo escenario epid‐
mico, surgi la demanda de un espacio de dilogo e  intercambio  de
conocimiento  sobre la prevencin de la transmisin de la COVID‐19.
Debido a la  interrupcin  de  las  actividades  regulares  de  la
Plataforma  de Saberes, se promovi una estrategia que sirviese de
vnculo integrador entre ciencia y sociedad y ayudase a superar el
aislamiento  social  impuesto por la pandemia de la COVID‐19.  El
grupo de WhatsApp posibilit a los integrantes del  proyecto,  que
participaran mediante la formulacin de preguntas (audio) sobre la
COVID‐19, a travs de la mediacin de los lderes de grupos  comuni‐
tarios.  Los principales cuestionamientos de los participantes se
relacionaron con factores de riesgo; formas de transmisin;  inmu‐
nidad  ante  el  nuevo  virus;  cuidados relacionados con la pre‐
vencin, sntomas y tratamiento; COVID‐19 y vacuna de la gripe.  El
material  educativo  Cuidar em tempos da COVID‐19 se produjo y se
comparti con los lderes comunitarios y fue puesto a disposicin de
los  respectivos grupos, as como difundido en sus comunidades, en
respuesta a una demanda de conocimiento que responde a  las  pre‐
ocupaciones  vividas  por los que ya se encuentran en situacin de
vulnerabilidad estructural.  Participao Cidad em  Cincia  e  Tec‐
nologia;  Promoo  da  Sade;  Isolamento Social; Participacin Ciu‐
dadana en Ciencia y Tecnologa; Promocin de la Salud;  Aislamiento
Social; COVID‐19 Submitted on 07/May/2020 Final version resubmit‐
ted on 17/May/2020 Approved on 26/May/2020 Cad. Sade Pblica 2020;
36(6):e00115020
















































