JOURNAL  OF  ADVANCED VETERINARY AND ANIMAL RESEARCH A periodical
of the Network for the Veterinarians of Bangladesh (BDvetNET) VOL
7,  NO.  2,  PAGES  198208  REVIEW ARTICLE The emergence of novel
coronavirus disease (COVID‐19)  in  Bangladesh:  Present  status,
challenges,  and  future management Mohammad Shah Alam1, Mohammad
Zahangeer Alam2, K. H. M. Nazmul Hussain Nazir3,  Md.  Abdullahil
Baki Bhuiyan4 ARTICLE HISTORY Immediate after the official decla‐
ration of COVID‐19 in Bangladesh on 8 March 2020, it has  created
public  panic  which  results  in price plummeting of the capital
market and price hike of many essential  commodities.  Worldwide,
the  outbreak  of  COVID‐19 has declared a pandemic. In response,
the Government of Bangladesh has initiated some  strict  measures
such  as  stopping  the entry of passengers from Europe, stopping
on‐arrival visas and self‐quarantine for 2 weeks for all  passen‐
gers return from abroad. Still, many loopholes exist at the entry
points of Bangladesh. Most of the people of Bangladesh are yet to
aware  of  the  consequences  of COVID‐19. In this backdrop, this
would be helpful to undertake future management practices against
the  fearsome  COVID‐19 in Revised March 17, 2020 The coronavirus
was first isolated in 1937,  which  caused  bronchitis  in  birds
[1,2].  However,  human  coronaviruses  (HCoV‐229E and HCoV‐OC43)
were first characterized in the 1960s [3], which were  associated
with  diseases in respiratory tracts such as bronchitis and pneu‐
monia and illnesses in the enteric  and  central  nervous  system
[3,4].  The  virus  is  named  as  coronavirus for the crown‐like
spikes on their surface [5]. According to the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, Atlanta, USA, the syndrome of coronavirus
is called severe acute respiratory  syndrome  (SARS).  The  virus
SARS‐associated coronavirus (SARS‐CoV) has received worldwide at‐
tention due to its epidemic appearance in 2003. Since then, a to‐
tal  of  8,098 people became sick, which claimed 774 lives across
the globe [6]. However, there were no known cases of SARS report‐
ed  anywhere  in  the  world  Correspondence  Md. Abdullahil Baki
Bhuiyan Coronavirus; outbreak;  fatality;  pneumonia;  Bangladesh
distributed  under  the  terms of the after 2004 [7]. Recently, a
novel coronavirus named SARSCoV‐2 has spread worldwide  [8],  in‐
cluding  Bangladesh,  which  is one of the most densely populated
countries (160 million) in the world [9]. Although overpopulated,
the  economy  of Bangladesh is booming in recent times [8]. Since
its independence in 1971, the annual gross  domestic  product  in
Bangladesh  was  8.75  billion, which is expected to reach 315.00
billion USD by the end of 2020 [8]. In this situation, the  emer‐
gence  of  novel  coronavirus (COVID‐19) in Bangladesh could be a
threat to the boosting economy.  Taxonomy, types, origin and evo‐
lution  of human Coronaviruses (CoVs) belong to the family Coron‐
aviridae under order Nidovirales. The  family  Coronoviridae  has
two  How to cite: Alam MS, Alam MZ, Nazir KHMNH, Bhuiyan MAB. The
emergence of novel coronavirus disease (COVID‐19) in  Bangladesh:
Present  status, challenges and future management. J Adv Vet Anim
Res 2020; 7(2):198208.
 Alam et al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2):  198208,  June  2020
subfamilies,  such  as  Orthocoronaviridae  and Torovirinae.  The
subfamily Orthocoronaviridae has four genera, such as alphacoron‐
avirus,  betacoronavirus,  gammacoronavirus  and deltacoronavirus
[10]. Until now, seven types of coronaviruses have the ability to
infect  human.  The  human coronaviruses are 229E, NL63, OC43 and
HKU1, and the rarer strains are SARS‐CoV [11] and Middle  Eastern
respiratory  syndrome  coronavirus (MERS‐CoV) which was first ap‐
peared in 2012 in Saudi Arabia [12] and  recent  SARSCoV‐2  [13].
The virus SARS‐CoV‐2 has a single‐stranded RNA genome ranged from
26 to 32 kilobases (kb) in length, which is one  of  the  largest
genomes  among  RNA  viruses  [14]. Ten genome sequences of SARS‐
Cov‐2 exhibited 88% identity with two bat‐derived SARS‐like coro‐
naviruses, bat‐SL‐CoVZC45 and bat‐SL‐CoVZXC21; however, they were
more distant from SARS‐CoV (about  79%)  and  MERSCoV  about  50%
[15].  Usually,  the  CoVs  are  commonly harbored in mammals and
birds as well as in camels, cattle, cats, bats, and other animals
[10].  Genomic  characterization of SARS‐CoV, MERS‐CoV, and SARS‐
CoV‐2 reported that the origination of these  viruses  was  bats.
The  intermediate hosts of SARS‐CoV and MERS‐CoV were masked palm
civets and dromedary camels, respectively, with human as terminal
hosts  [16].  However,  the  intermediate hosts of SARS‐CoV‐2 are
predicted to be the unknown wild animals sold at the seafood mar‐
ket  [16,17].   Worldwide  severity  and  outbreak of novel human
coronavirus (COVID‐19) A new type of pneumonia  was  detected  in
Wuhan  city,  Hubei Province of China, on 31 December 2019. Since
then, a total of 44 cases with an unknown type of pneumonia  were
detected until 3 January 2020 [18,19]. The outbreak of this pneu‐
monia was associated with exposures in one  seafood  market.  The
unknown case was confirmed as a new type of coronavirus on 7 Jan‐
uary 2020. Outside of China, the same kind of  novel  coronavirus
was identified on 13, 15, and 20 January 2020 in Thailand, Japan,
and the Health Organization [20], the cases in  Thailand,  Japan,
City,  China. Officially, the WHO has named the novel coronavirus
as SARS‐CoV‐2 causing coronavirus disease‐2019 confirmed case  (a
person with laboratory confirmation) of COVID‐19 was 282 (claimed
six lives), which had skyrocketed to 153,517 (claimed 5735 lives)
on  15 March 2020 (Fig. 1). Due to the severe outbreak across the
globe, the WHO declared the outbreak of COVID‐19 is  pandemic  on
11 March 2020 [8].
 Alam  et  al./  J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 198208, June 2020
According to the  current  WHO  report,  the  total  fatality  of
COVID‐19 is 5,735 with a fatality rate of only 3.73% [8].  Howev‐
er, overall mortality combinedly caused by SARSCoV  and  MERS‐CoV
was  1632  [21,22],  with the rate of occurrence of 9.6% [23] and
35.2% [2], respectively. When recorded every day; therefore,  the
mortality  rate  of COVID19 might be changing, which could not be
calculated accurately until the end of this outbreak.   The  out‐
break of COVID‐19 and its consequence in Three confirmed cases of
COVID‐19 announced for the of epidemiology, disease control,  and
research  (IEDCR).   Subsequently,  there were no confirmed cases
found on 13 March 2020. However, on 14 March 2020, two more  con‐
firmed  cases  newly  detected in Bangladesh. Until now, COVID‐19
caused no fatality in Bangladesh. Among the and Spain ranked 2nd,
3rd,  4th,  and  5th,  respectively, after China [8] (Fig. 2). In
comparison to the global perspective, although the occurrence  of
COVID‐19 is very low (only 0.003%) in Bangladesh, the panic which
spreads among the most densely  populated  country  (160  million
people)  in  the  world  is immense. The first blow of this panic
hits into the Bangladesh stock market; due to the  fear  selling,
the  general  index  of  the DSE plunged 279.32 points (6.51%) to
close the day at 4,008.05 [24]. The panic also  affected  foreign
trade.  Qatar  temporarily  barred travelers from Bangladesh. The
Prime Minister of India, Narendra Modi, has canceled his trip  to
Bangladesh  on  the occasion of grand inaugural ceremony of Mujib
Year [25], and there is excessive price gouging  of  some  essen‐
tials such as infected countries and Bangladesh with a percentage
share of global cases as of 16 March 2020. (Source:  WHO;  situa‐
tion  report surgical and face masks, sanitizers, electronics and
electrical materials, and so on. [26]. The Government on 14 March
2020  declared that no inbound passengers from European countries
except the UK would be allowed in Bangladesh until 31 March 2020.
All  kinds  of  on‐arrival  visas  have  been suspended for new 2
weeks. Besides, passengers return from any country would be self‐
quarantined for 14 days [27]. Still, any relaxation on monitoring
this disease would be very costly. All kinds of  educational  in‐
stitutions would remain close until 31 March 2020 [27]. Moreover,
all sports activities to be postponed until 31 March  2020  [27].
Unlike  the  USA,  Spain, Serbia, France, and Lebanon, Bangladesh
has yet to declare a state of emergency. The country is now in  a
state  of uncertainty, just watching the global initiatives.  The
Prime Minister (PM) of Bangladesh has promptly accepted the pres‐
ence  and reality of COVID‐19 in to closely monitor the situation
at all the entry points of Bangladesh and to improve the  facili‐
ties  of  all  the public hospitals by ensuring enough quarantine
facilities. The PM also canceled all the  prescheduled  meetings,
processions,  public gatherings, and foreign trips.  Epidemiology
of COVID‐19 Environmental factors such as temperature,  humidity,
and  wind  speed  have  a  significant effect on the survival and
transmission of human coronaviruses such as SARSCoV and  MERS‐CoV
[28].  In  general,  the survival of viral SARS‐CoV could survive
for 5 days on a smooth surface at 22C25C  and  relative  humidity
40%50%  [28].  However, it is lost its activity with the increase
of temperature and relative humidity at 38C and 95%,  respective‐
ly.  The  possible  transmission of SARS‐CoV has occurred through
airborne droplets. Furthermore, this virus could survive in human
feces  [30].  Another human coronavirus MERS‐CoV could remain ac‐
tive for an extended period as droplets on the solid  surface  at
high  temperature (15C35C) and low humidity (<20%). However, with
the  increase  of  relative  humidity  (>35%)  and   temperatures
(5C15C),  the  survivability  and spread of MERS‐CoV would be re‐
duced [31].  Although newly emerged novel  SARS‐CoV‐2  virus  has
similar  origin  with SARS‐CoV and MERS‐CoV, the role of tempera‐
ture and absolute humidity in  the  transmission  is  yet  to  be
clearly  understood. The contradictory reports have scientists in
China [32] reported that the increased temperature  and  humidity
did not reduce the incidence of COVID‐19 [32]. However, according
to Wang et al. [29], the increased temperate and relative humidi‐
ty  significantly  reduced  the  transmission  of COVID‐19 in 100
cities of China.  Similarly,  another  group  reported  that  the
COVID‐19
 Alam  et  al./  J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 198208, June 2020
virus is sensitive to high temperatures (>30C)  [33].  Using  the
current  statistics  available  in situation report 55 at the WHO
website [8], the cumulative rate of confirmed cases and deaths of
COVID‐19 is 1.4% and 0.52%, respectively, in tropical or subtrop‐
ical countries or regions, but it is 98.59% and  99.47%,  respec‐
tively,  in  temperate countries or subtropical and temperate re‐
gions/countries.  Tropical/subtropical countries or regions  Tem‐
perate countries or regions Confirmed cases Confirmed cases Saudi
Arabia Sri Lanka United Kingdom United States of Total  Confirmed
cases  Total  deaths Percent of confirmed cases in tropical/ sub‐
tropical countries/regions Percent of confirmed cases in  temper‐
ate  countries/ regions Percent of death in tropical/ subtropical
countries/regions Percent of death in temperate countries/regions
Up to 16 March 2020 [8].
 Alam  et  al./  J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 198208, June 2020
transmission of COVID‐19 and deaths in different climatic regions
are  caused by the variation of temperature and relative humidity
in these countries or regions.  Although the mechanism of  trans‐
mission  of  COVID‐19 is not fully understood, the recent studies
of Huang et al.  [34] and Chan et al. [35] have  reported  human‐
to‐human  transmission  through the respiratory droplets and sur‐
face contact. The droplets are generated from the infected person
through  his  coughs  or  sneezes, which could potentially infect
others remaining in close contact  [36].  The  virus  within  the
droplets  could  remain  viable on the surface of an object for a
few days; thus, the nearby surroundings of an infected person are
potential  sources  of  contamination.  The symptomatic (sickest)
persons are thought to be most contagious. Moreover, recent  evi‐
dence  suggests  that  a  person  without symptoms (asymptomatic)
could potentially spread the pathogen during the incubation peri‐
od [37].  Unlike SARS virus, the risk of contamination by COVID19
virus through feces of an infected person is low [34].   Besides,
there is no evidence of airborne dissemination of The subtropical
monsoon climate in Bangladesh is characterized  by  heavy  summer
rainfall and high summer temperature with often excessive humidi‐
ty. The range of ambient temperature in the summer is 36C40C, and
winter  temperature  is 8C15C [38]. If the studies of Wang et al.
[29,33] are true and if the trend of disease occurrence  particu‐
larly  in  the summer season. Although the mechanism of high tem‐
perature and high humidity reduces the transmission  of  COVID‐19
is  not  known  yet, in the case of temperatures, and respiratory
droplets remain airborne longer in dry air [39,40]. Second,  cold
and  dry  weather impairs mucociliary clearance, innate antiviral
immunity, and tissue repair and makes them  more  susceptible  to
the virus [41,42]. These mechanisms are also likely to applicable
for the COVID‐19  transmission.   Pathogenesis  of  COVID‐19  The
clinical  signs  and  symptoms are almost similar to that of SARS
and MERS infections [43]. Hence,  although  the  pathogenesis  of
COVID‐19 is poorly understood, the similar mechanisms of SARS and
MERS still can give us a lot of information on  the  pathogenesis
of  COVID‐19.   The  lungs  are made up of a mass of alveoli. The
alveoli are responsible for gaseous exchange, providing oxygen to
blood  flowing  through capillaries in the alveolar membrane. The
alveolar walls are composed of type I and  type  II  pneumocytes,
along with alveolar macrophages (Fig. 3) [44]. Type I pneumocytes
are responsible for gaseous exchange with blood in the  capillar‐
ies of the lungs. Type II pneumocytes are the progenitors of type
I pneumocytes and are also responsible for  producing  surfactant
[45].   SARS‐CoV  infection causes desquamation of pneumocytes by
releasing inflammatory cytokine in humans and rats  and  alveolar
swelling,  edema,  and hemorrhage in the lungs (Fig. 3) [46]. The
virus also destroys alveolar macrophages that play  an  essential
role  in local immune response [47].  In critical illness, uncon‐
trolled inflammation, fluid accumulation, and developing fibrosis
severely  compromise gas exchange and lead to respiratory failure
[42].  Symptoms of COVID‐19 The symptoms of COVID‐19  are  either
asymptomatic  (no  signs)  or symptomatic (non‐, mild‐, or severe
pneumonia) [48]. The range of mild disease (i.e., nonpneumonia or
mild  pneumonia)  is about 80% of cases (mostly curable), mildto‐
severe pneumonia is about 14%, and critical illness is  about  6%
of cases [22]. The critical illnesses lead to severe consequences
such as a death in the case of the elderly or  other  people  who
have severe chronic medical conditions such as heart disease, di‐
abetes, and lung diseases [15].  Other common signs  of  COVID‐19
infection  are  respiratory  symptoms, fever, coughing, sneezing,
shortness of breath, Diagnosis of COVID‐19 infection As there are
no  specific  therapeutic  drugs  or vaccines available for novel
COVID‐19; therefore, it is essential to detect the disease at  an
early  stage  so that immediate isolation of the patient could be
undertaken. Thus, the radiological examination is  used  for  the
early  detection  of COVID‐19 [49]. Thin‐slice chest CT functions
are more effectively detecting pneumonia caused by COVID‐19 at  a
very  early stage [50]. The sensitivity of CT for COVID‐19 infec‐
tion was 98%, but it was much higher than the sensitivity (71%; p
<  0.001) of RT‐PCR [49,51]. Although nucleic acid‐based (3%) pa‐
tients, who had negative RT‐qPCR  for  COVID‐19  at  the  initial
stage  of  COVID‐19  but  conduction of chest CT, confirmed viral
pneumonia at the early stage.  The collection of samples for  the
detection of the virus is a big challenge for the health workers.
The recommended specimens for COVID‐19 diagnosis are  nasopharyn‐
geal  and  oropharyngeal  swabs; however, the collection of these
samples requires close contact with the patients, which  poses  a
risk  of transmission of the viruses to the healthcare personnel.
Therefore, saliva specimens are suggested because patients  could
easily  spit  their saliva into a sterile bottle in a noninvasive
way [53]. Meanwhile, real‐time RT‐PCR using blood samples gave  a
very low percentage
 Alam  et  al./  J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 198208, June 2020
and resident alveolar macrophages and pulmonary surfactant  exist
in  the  airspace  (A).  In the acute phase of SARS‐CoV infection
(B), type I and type II pneumocytes are infected and secrete  in‐
flammatory  cytokines, whereas surfactant levels decrease. In se‐
vere illness, inflammation, fluid  accumulation,  and  developing
fibrosis  severely damage alveoli and lead to respiratory failure
(C).  Clinical signs and Zoonotic transmission Incubation  period
Bats  harbor  the three coronaviruses as a reservoir host.  It is
still unclear whether the COVID‐19 transmitted from bats  to  hu‐
mans  [10].  Then,  humanto‐human  transmission through droplets,
personal (handshaking), and contaminated surface contact [34,35].
It  seems to be more transmissible than SARS and 214 days [10,55]
Mostly respiratory symptoms, such as fever, dry cough,  shortness
of breath, and in the most severe cases, have pneumonia [10] Pri‐
marily transmitted from bats to snakes, civet cats,  and  finally
to  human [10]. Then, similar transmission to COVID‐19, including
fecal [34,60].  210 days, up to 14 days [10] Primarily  transmit‐
ted  from bats to camels and finally to human [10] and then human
to human transmission via direct  respiratory  secretion  contact
[34]  and  also fecal‐oral transmission [60].  days [10] Clinical
diagnosis based on symptoms, history and chest imaging, and diag‐
nosis by nucleic acid test, such as RT‐qPCR, deep sequencing, and
ELISA [34,56].  No antiviral drug yet [57,58]. Oxygen  and  fluid
therapy  and  antibiotics with oseltamivir [34,57,58].  In severe
illness, corticosteroids are used  to  reduce  lung  inflammation
[59].  Besides respiratory Similar to COVID‐19 symptoms [10], the
virus is known to cause enteric symptom, such as diarrhea and ab‐
dominal  pain,  and  finally  focal necrosis and nephritis in the
kidney [60].  Similar to COVID‐19 Severe acute  respiratory  dis‐
tress,  severe  pneumonia,  enteric  symptoms, and kidney failure
[60,61].  Similar to COVID‐19 Similar to COVID‐19
 Alam et al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2):  198208,  June  2020
(1%) of the positive results, and urine samples did not give pos‐
itive results [54].  which provides the diagnostic facilities  of
COVID‐19.  The  detection of COVID‐19 is a real‐time RT‐PCR‐based
assay that requires skilled  human  resources  and  sophisticated
laboratory  facilities.  To avoid false results and risks of bio‐
logical hazards, the Government is not allowing any other private
organizations  except IEDCR to perform this [27].  The rapid test
kits are although available in Bangladesh, but the WHO  does  not
approve  these  kits.   Prevention  and control of COVID‐19 It is
popularly said that prevention is better than  cure.   Prevention
of  COVID‐19 should be the prime strategy to restrict this deadly
disease from a further outbreak in Bangladesh. The WHO  suggested
that the transmission of COVID‐19 should be prevented by reducing
the secondary infections among close  contact  with  persons  who
suffer  from  acute  respiratory  infections.  Besides, the hands
should be frequently washed after direct contact with a sick per‐
son;  furthermore,  the  unprotected  contact  with  wild animals
should be avoided. Moreover, the COVID‐19infected  person  should
maintain  a good practice of cough etiquettes such as by covering
coughs and sneezes with disposable tissues or clean  clothes,  by
washing  hands, and by maintaining distance with noninfected per‐
sons [15]. In addition to these preventive measures, the  Govern‐
ment of Bangladesh should be undertaken stern actions against the
passengers, such as strictly measuring their body temperature  or
keep them in an isolation condition for 14 days at the land, sea,
and airports after arrival from COVID‐19infected countries.   Ef‐
fective  vaccines  are  essential to control the coronavirus out‐
breaks. There are several  vaccination  strategies  used  against
SARS‐CoV, and MERS‐CoV tested in animals, including a live‐atten‐
uated virus, inactivated  virus,  subunit  vaccines,  recombinant
DNA, and protein vaccines [62].  These studies are still underway
to develop vaccines for Unlike SARS‐CoV and MERS‐CoV,  no  proven
vaccines  so  far discovered against COVID‐19. However, the first
trial of evaluating a vaccine against COVID‐19 has  begun  on  15
March  2020 at kaiser permanente washington health promising tar‐
gets for COVID‐19, but more clinical trials still should be need‐
ed.   Management of COVID‐19 contamination Evidence suggests that
the virus is  contaminated  from  human  to  human  very  rapidly
[35,64]. Although complete elimination of COVID‐19 outbreak seems
impossible, several key measures could reduce the possible trans‐
mission  of  SARS‐CoV‐2  by avoiding the contact opportunities of
outbreak, traveling and trade restrictions,  entry  screening  of
the  travelers during outbreak period, isolation of infected cas‐
es, and maintaining the physical distance within  the  workspace.
In  this  backdrop, flexible working schedules/shifts for employ‐
ees, the opportunity of distance  working/teleworking,  increased
use  of  email  and teleconferences to reduce close contacts, re‐
duced contact between employees and  customers,  reduced  contact
between employees, promoting the use of other personal protective
countermeasures, and  avoiding  mass  gathering,  such  as  sport
events,  concerts,  religious  events, conferences, and so on are
advised.  According to the WHO, the practice of good personal hy‐
giene is essential [8,66]. Regularly washing hands with soaps and
water and avoid touching the face with the hands are some ways to
ensure  personal hygiene. Wearing a mask is not essential until a
person is detected with SARSCoV‐2 to protect spreading the  virus
to  the public [67]. The infected person should take rest at home
or admit to the hospital for complete isolation for 14  days.  In
case  of  emergency,  the  infected person should wear a surgical
mask to protect others.  Potential treatments against COVID‐19 As
we know, no effective treatments are available for viral diseases
[57,58]. The supportive treatments such as oxygen  therapy,  con‐
servation fluid management, and the use of broad‐spectrum antibi‐
otics to treat secondary bacterial infection are still  practiced
as  important  management  are  used  to reduce lung inflammation
[59]. Some of the drugs such as oseltamivir, lopinavir/ritonavir,
nucleoside analogs, neuraminidase inhibitors, remdesivir, umifen‐
ovir, tenofovir disoproxil and lamivudine  (inhibitors),  chloro‐
quine, and Shufeng Jiedu or Lianhua Qingwen capsules (traditional
medicines of China) are advised to treat COVID19 [59,6870]. More‐
over, some inhibitors such as 3CLpro (3CLpro‐1) and a novel vinyl
sulfone protease and angiotensin‐converting enzyme 2 (ACE2)‐based
peptide showed their potentiality against SARS‐CoV‐2 [71]. Usual‐
ly, drugs are not effective against viral diseases. Recently,  an
antiviral  drug Favilavir has approved by Chinas National Medical
Products Administration on 16 February  2020  to  treat  COVID‐19
[72]. This drug has produced by Zhejiang Hisun Pharmaceutical and
marketed as  brand  name  Avigan  [73].   Current  challenges  of
COVID‐19 in Bangladesh News such as Coronavirus Outbreak: Screen‐
ing still lax at Dhaka airport in the Daily Star on 10 March 2020
[74]
 Alam  et  al./  J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 198208, June 2020
has frustrated the  governments  efforts  to  combat  the  deadly
COVID‐19 in Bangladesh. Few initiatives have been observed at the
Shah Jalal International Airport, such as  the  setting  of  some
thermal  scanners  to  check the realtime body temperature of the
passengers and filling up a health declaration form. However,  no
disinfection  activities  and  none  of the confirmation tests by
taking samples from the passengers body have performed. According
to  the  WHO,  the disease could remain asymptomatic for up to 14
days. Therefore, thermal  scanner  and  travel  history  are  not
enough  measures  to  detect COVID‐19 among the passengers. Apart
from passengers scanning, no initiatives have taken to  disinfect
the  planes and luggage of the passengers.  There is a misconcep‐
tion among the people of Bangladesh that the  disease  would  not
sustain  in  the country due to the onset of summer when the tem‐
perature would remain above 30C. However, the  recent  study  re‐
ported  that  temperature  does  not  change  the transmission of
COVID‐19 [46]; unlike the SARS virus, there is no  evidence  that
the  outbreak  of COVID‐19 would be reduced at higher temperature
[75].  Other challenges are (i) lack of laboratory facilities for
the early detection of the disease, (ii) scarcity of medical sup‐
plies, such as surgical masks and goggles, (iv) lack of  personal
protective  equipment (PPE) for healthcare personnel, (iv) asymp‐
tomatic transmission of COVID‐19 which could challenge  the  man‐
agement  strategies  at risk [41], (v) lack of quarantine facili‐
ties at the hospitals, (v) it is very  unfortunate  that  a  good
number  of  people of Bangladesh are not maintaining good hygiene
and sanitation practices, and (vi) until now, no  specific  drugs
or vaccines have been proven effective against COVID‐19.  Global‐
ly, as there are no vaccines discovered against novel coronavirus
disease  COVID‐19;  therefore,  prevention and management are the
best ways to tackle this deadly disease. By comparing the  global
outbreak, confirmed cases are only 0.003% in Bangladesh [8]. How‐
ever, stern actions should be taken immediately so  that  further
penetration  of any case is not possible through the land‐, sea‐,
and airports. Nationally, public awareness is the crucial  factor
in protecting this disease. The health officials, doctors, and to
educate them about the protection  and  safety  measures  against
COVID‐19.   Early  and  quick detection are essential measures to
stop the transmission of COVID‐19. The diagnostic  facilities  of
Bangladesh  should be improved by providing the detection facili‐
ties at all the divisional,  district,  and  upazilla  hospitals.
Once  a  new case is detected, he should be isolated immediately.
Some general recommendations are suggested as (i) as per the WHOs
guidelines  [23],  hand  hygiene  must  be maintained by cleaning
hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using  alco‐
hol‐based  hand  sanitizer,  (ii)  avoid contact hands with eyes,
nose, and mouth, (iii) the use of disposable tissues or  clothing
when  coughs  and  sneezes, (iv) health personnel must ensure PPE
while working, (v) avoid interpersonal contact such  as  kissing,
handshaking,  and so on, (vi) avoid mass gathering and seek medi‐
cal care when anyone feels fever, cough, and  difficulty  breath‐
ing,  (ix)  once  a person is detected positive with COVID‐19, he
must be isolated for at least 14 days, (x)  operation  of  public
transportations  such as local buses, launches, and trains should
be limited for 23 weeks, and (xi) passengers return  from  abroad
should be self‐quarantined for 2 weeks.  Specific recommendations
to the government  are  as  (i)             Apart  from  European
flights,  passengers from other infected countries such as China,
the should undergo extensive screening and, if  possible,  should
be  kept  in force isolation for 2 weeks. Besides, the planes and
luggage arriving from  these  countries  should  be  disinfected.
Compulsory  screening of passengers must be maintained at all the
entry points of Bangladesh.  (ii)    Collaborative  research  be‐
tween  the  WHO  and  government  or  nongovernment organizations
should be carried out immediately to develop a vaccine for  SARS‐
CoV‐2.  (iii)   Providing sufficient funds to conduct research on
epidemiology,  surveillance,  and  management  of   COVID‐19   in
Bangladesh.   (iv)    Frequently  circulate  the  news  of public
awareness and precautions about COVID‐19 in mass Nothing to  dis‐
close.   Conflict of interests Mohammad Shah Alam was involved in
the planning and
 Alam et al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2):  198208,  June  2020
Nazmul  Hussain  Nazir  and Md. Abdullahil Baki Bhuiyan Beaudette
FR, Hudson CB. Cultivation of the virus of infectious bronchitis.
J  Am  Vet Med Assoc 1937; 90:5160.  Wang W, Lin XD, Guo WP, Zhou
RH, Wang MR, Wang CQ et al.  Discovery, diversity  and  evolution
of novel coronaviruses sampled Gaunt ER, Hardie A, Claas EC, Sim‐
monds P, Templeton KE.  Epidemiology and  clinical  presentations
of  the  four  human coronaviruses 229E, HKU1, NL63, and OC43 de‐
tected over 3 years using a novel multiplex real‐time PCR method.
J  Clin  Microbiol  2010; Kahn JS, McIntosh K. History and recent
advances in coronavirus Lin S, Lee CK, Lee SY, Kao  CL,  Lin  CW,
Wang  AB,  et  al. Surface ultrastructure of SARS coronavirus re‐
vealed by atomic force Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
CDC.  Outbreak  of  severe acute respiratory syndrome‐‐worldwide.
MMWR‐Morbid Mortal W 2003; 52(11): 226.  World  Health  Organiza‐
tion (WHO). Novel coronavirus (2019‐nCoV).  default‐source/coron‐
aviruse/situation‐re‐
ports/20200315‐sitrep‐55‐covid‐19.pdf?sfvrsn=33daa5cb_6 (Accessed
16 March Ashour HM, Elkhatib WF, Rahman MM,  Elshabrawy  HA.  In‐
sights  into  the  Recent  2019 Novel Coronavirus (SARS‐CoV‐2) in
Light of Past Human Coronavirus Outbreaks. Pathogens 2020;  9(3):
pii:  Matoba Y, Aoki Y, Tanaka S, Yahagi K, Shimotai Y, Matsuzaki
Y, et al. An outbreak of human coronavirus OC43 during  the  2014
2015  influenza season in Yamagata, Japan. Jpn J Infect Dis 2015;
Chen X, Chughtai AA, Dyda A, MacIntyre CR. Comparative epidemiol‐
ogy  of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERSCoV) in
Saudi Arabia and South Korea. Emerg Microbes Infec 2017; Ahmad T,
Rodriguez‐Morales  AJ.  Emergence  of  COVID‐19 (formerly Lai CC,
Shih TP, Ko WC, Tang HJ, Hsueh PR. Severe acute respiratory  syn‐
drome  coronavirus  2  (SARS‐CoV‐2)  and coronavirus disease‐2019
(COVID‐19): the epidemic and the challenges. Int J Lu R, Zhao  X,
Li  J,  Niu  P, Yang B, Wu H, et al. Genomic characterisation and
epidemiology of 2019 novel coronavirus:  implications  for  virus
origins  and  receptor binding. Lancet 2020; 395(10224):565 Jiang
S, Du L, Shi Z. 2020. An emerging coronavirus  causing  pneumonia
outbreak  in Wuhan, China: calling for developing therapeutic and
prophylactic strategies. Emerg Microbes Infec 2020; Kim JY,  Choe
PG,  Oh  Y,  Oh KJ, Kim J, Park SJ, et al. The first case of 2019
novel coronavirus pneumonia imported into Korea from Zhu N, Zhang
D,  Wang W, Li X, Yang B, Song J, et al. A novel coronavirus from
patients with pneumonia in China, 2019.  New  Engl  J  Med  World
Health  Organization (WHO). Novel Coronavirus Chu YK, Ali GD, Jia
F, Li Q, Kelvin D, Couch RC, et al. The SARSCoV ferret  model  in
an  infectionchallenge  study.  Virology  2008;  Mahase E. Coron‐
avirus: covid‐19 has killed more people than SARS and  MERS  com‐
bined,  despite  lower case fatality rate. BMJ 2020; World Health
Organization. Water, sanitation, hygiene and waste management for
COVID‐19: technical brief, 03.03/2020 (No.  The Prothom alo. DSE,
CSE post massive plunge. Available via The India Today. PM  Modis
Dhaka  trip  cancelled after 3 coronavirus The Independent. Panic
buying triggers mask, sanitiser crises.  Casanova LM, Jeon S, Ru‐
tala WA, Weber DJ, Sobsey MD. Effects of air temperature and rel‐
ative humidity on coronavirus survival on Booth  TF,  Kournikakis
B, Bastien N, Ho J, Kobasa D, Stadnyk L, et al. Detection of air‐
borne severe acute respiratory syndrome  (SARS)  coronavirus  and
environmental  contamination in SARS Alghamdi IG, Hussain II, Al‐
malki SS, Alghamdi MS, Alghamdi MM, El‐Sheemy MA. 2014. The  pat‐
tern  of  Middle  East  respiratory syndrome coronavirus in Saudi
Arabia: a descriptive epidemiological analysis of data  from  the
Saudi  Ministry  of Health. Int J Gen Med Luo W, Majumder MS, Liu
D, Poirier C, Mandl KD, Lipsitch M, et al. The role  of  absolute
humidity  on  transmission Wang M, Jiang A, Gong L, Luo L, Guo W,
Li C, et al. Temperature significant change COVID‐19 Transmission
in 429 cities. medRxiv
 Alam  et  al./  J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 198208, June 2020
Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, Zhao J, Hu Y, et al. Clinical  fea‐
tures  of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan,
Chan JF, Yuan S, Kok KH, To KK, Chu H, Yang J, et al. A  familial
cluster  of  pneumonia associated with the 2019 novel coronavirus
Coronavirus disease  (COVID‐19)  advice  for  the  public.  World
Health  Organization,  Geneva,  Switzerland,  2020. Available via
Rothe C, Schunk M, Sothmann P, Bretzel G, Froeschl  G,  Wallrauch
C, et al. Transmission of 2019nCoV Infection from an asymptomatic
contact in Germany. New Engl J Med 2020; 382(10):9701; Huda  ASN,
Mekhilef  S, Ahsan A. 2014. Biomass energy in Bangladesh: current
status and prospects. Renew Sust Energ Rev Eccles R. An  explana‐
tion  for  the seasonality of acute upper respiratory tract viral
infections. Acta Otolaryngol 2002; 122:18391;  Kudo  E,  Song  E,
Yockey LJ, Rakib T, Wong PW, Homer RJ, et al.  Low ambient humid‐
ity impairs barrier function and innate  resistance  against  in‐
fluenza  infection.  Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2019; Peiris JS, Guan
Y, Yuen KY. Severe acute respiratory syndrome, Nat Verma GP. Fun‐
damentals of histology. New Age International Pvt Zhao J, Zhao J,
Van Rooijen N, Perlman S. Evasion by stealth.  Inefficient immune
activation  underlies  poor T cell response and severe disease in
SARS‐CoV infected mice. PloS Pathog 2009; Velavan TP,  Meyer  CG.
The  COVID19  epidemic. Trop Med Int Zu ZY, Jiang MD, Xu PP, Chen
W, Ni QQ, Lu GM, et al. Coronavirus Disease  2019  (COVID‐19):  a
perspective  from  China.  Radiology Ai T, Yang Z, Hou H, Zhan C,
Chen C, Lv W, et al. Correlation of chest CT and  RT‐PCR  testing
in coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‐19) in Fang Y, Zhang H, Xie J,
Lin M, Ying L, Pang  P,  et  al.  Sensitivity  of  chest  CT  for
COVID‐19:  comparison  to  RT‐PCR. Radiology 2020; 200432; Xie X,
Zhong Z, Zhao W, Zheng C, Wang F, Liu J.  Chest  CT  for  typical
2019‐nCoV  pneumonia:  relationship  to  negative  RT‐PCR To KKW,
Tsang OTY, Yip CCY, Chan KH, Wu TC, Chan JMC, et al.   Consistent
detection  of  2019  novel coronavirus in saliva. Clin Guarner J.
Three emerging coronaviruses in two decades the  story  of  SARS,
MERS,  and Now COVID‐19. Am J Clin Pathol 2020; Xiaowei L, Manman
G, Yizhao P, Liesu M, Shemin L. Molecular immune pathogenesis and
diagnosis  of  COVID‐19.  J Pharmaceut de Wit E, van Doremalen N,
Falzarano D, Munster VJ. SARS  and  MERS:  recent  insights  into
emerging  coronaviruses.  Nat Zumla A, Chan JF, Azhar EI, Hui DS,
Yuen KY. Coronaviruses ‐ drug The SARS,  MERS  and  novel  coron‐
avirus (COVID‐19) epidemics, the newest and biggest global health
threats: what lessons have Yeo C, Kaushal S, Yeo D.  Enteric  in‐
volvement  of  coronaviruses: is faecaloral transmission of SARS‐
CoV‐2 possible?  Zaki AM, van Boheemen S, Bestebroer  TM,  Oster‐
haus AD, Fouchier RA. Isolation of a novel coronavirus from a man
with pneumonia in n e w s ‐ re l e a s e s / n i h ‐ c l i n i  c
a  l  ‐  t  r  i  a  l ‐ i nve s t i g a t i o n a l ‐ va c cine‐
covid‐19‐begins (Accessed 16 March 2020).  Riou  J,  Althaus  CL.
Pattern  of early human‐to‐human transmission of Wuhan 2019 novel
coronavirus (2019nCoV), December 2019 European Centre for Disease
Prevention and Control (ECDC) Technical report. Infection preven‐
tion and control for the  care  of  patients  with  2019‐nCoV  in
healthcare  settings.  Available  via nove‐coronavirus‐infection‐
prevention‐controlpatients‐healthcare‐settings.pdf  (Accessed  12
February  2020).   Li Q, Guan X, Wu P, Wang X, Zhou L, Tong Y, et
al. Early transmission dynamics in Wuhan, China, of Novel  Coron‐
avirus‐Infected Amodio E, Vitale F, Cimino L, Casuccio A, Tramuto
F. Outbreak of Novel Coronavirus  (SARS‐Cov‐2):  First  evidences
from  international  scientific literature and pending questions.
Healthcare Lu H. Drug treatment options for the  2019‐new  coron‐
avirus Wang M, Cao R, Zhang L, Yang X, Liu J, Xu M, et al. Remde‐
sivir and Wang L, Shi W, Joyce MG, Modjarrad K, Zhang Y, Leung K,
et  al.  Evaluation of candidate vaccine approaches for MERS‐CoV.
Morse JS, Lalonde T, Xu S, Liu WR. Learning from the past: possi‐
ble urgent prevention and treatment options for severe acute
 Alam  et  al./  J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 198208, June 2020
respiratory infections caused by 2019nCoV. Chembiochem 2020; Wang
M,  Jiang  A, Gong L, Luo L, Guo W, Li C, et al. Temperature sig‐
nificant change COVID‐19 Transmission in 429 cities. medRxiv
 Alam et al./ J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 7(2): 198208, June 2020















