Influenza Vaccination and COVID19 Mortality in the Claudio Zanet‐
tini1,* , Mohamed Omar2,* , Wikum Dinalankara1 , Eddie Luidy Ima‐
da1  , Elizabeth Colantuoni3 , Giovanni Parmigiani4,5 , and Luigi
Marchionni1,+ of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell
Medicine,  New York, NY, USA COVID‐19 mortality rate is higher in
the elderly and in those with preexisting chronic medical  condi‐
tions.  The elderly also suffer from increased morbidity and mor‐
tality from seasonal influenza infection,  and  thus  annual  in‐
fluenza  vaccination  is recommended for them.  In this study, we
explore a possible area‐level association between influenza  vac‐
cination  coverage in people aged 65 years and older and the num‐
ber of deaths from COVID‐19. To this end, we used  COVID‐19  data
until  June 10, 2020 together with population health data for the
United States at the county level. We fit  quasi‐Poisson  regres‐
sion  models  using influenza vaccination coverage in the elderly
population as the independent variable and the number  of  deaths
from COVID‐19 as the outcome variable. We adjusted for a wide ar‐
ray of potential confounding variables  using  both  county‐level
generalized propensity scores for influenza vaccination rates, as
well as direct adjustment.  Our results  suggest  that  influenza
vaccination  coverage in the elderly population is negatively as‐
sociated with mortality from COVID‐19. This finding is robust  to
using different analysis periods, different thresholds for inclu‐
sion of counties, and a variety of methodologies for  confounding
adjustment.   In conclusion, our results suggest a potential pro‐
tective effect of the influenza vaccine on COVID‐19 mortality  in
the  elderly  population.  The significant public health implica‐
tions of this possibility point to an urgent  need  for  studying
the  relationship between influenza vaccination and COVID‐19 mor‐
tality at the individual level, to investigate both the  epidemi‐
ology  and any underlying biological mechanism.  COVID‐19, a dis‐
ease caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome  coronavirus
2  (SARS‐CoV‐2),  has  become a global health threat owing to its
high rate of spread and mortality. By June 10,  2020,  the  total
number  of  cases  worldwide had reached more than 7 million with
approximately 411,195 confirmed deaths1 . The disease started  in
Wuhan, China in December 2019 as a zoonotic infection, but strong
evidence  suggests  that  efficient  human‐to‐human  transmission
started  as  early  as mid‐December 20192 . Such person‐to‐person
transmission occurs mainly through respiratory droplets with sev‐
eral  studies  reporting  the possibility of spread from asympto‐
matic patients3, 4 .  Most symptomatic infections are  mild  with
nearly 14% of infected individuals developing severe disease with
dyspnea and hypoxia. Critical illness has been seen in only 5% of
cases in the form of septic shock and respiratory and multi‐organ
failure5 .  In symptomatic patients, the most frequent  presenta‐
tion is pneumonia, manifested by fever, fatigue, dry cough, dysp‐
nea, and pulmonary infiltration6, 7 . Other  symptoms  have  also
been  reported including, but not limited to sore throat, nausea,
diarrhea, myalgia, confusion, anosmia, and other taste abnormali‐
ties8,  9  . The risk of developing severe complications and mor‐
tality rates is higher in the elderly, in males, and in  patients
with   co‐morbidities,  especially  hypertension,  diabetes,  and
chronic respiratory conditions including asthma and  chronic  ob‐
structive pulmonary disease (COPD)10, 11 . Acute respiratory dis‐
tress syndrome (ARDS) is the most common complication  in  people
with  severe illness with the incidence being higher in the older
population.  Seasonal respiratory viral co‐infections, most  com‐
monly  influenza  A  and  B,  have  been reported in COVID‐19 pa‐
tients12, 13 .  Seasonal influenza causes distinct outbreaks  ev‐
ery year with the attack rate varying from 10% to 20%. Similar to
COVID‐19, the morbidity and mortality are also higher in the old‐
er  population  and  in  patients  with chronic comorbidities14 .
Thus, routine annual vaccination is recommended in these  groups.
While in the elderly the vaccine is of clear benefit, the benefit
is even higher in those with high‐risk  illnesses.  The  absolute
risk  reduction  from  the vaccine was 2 to 4 folds higher in the
elderly population with chronic underlying conditions compared to
the healthy population of the same age group, even when there was
a poor match between the vaccine and circulating strains15 ,  and
when the vaccine effectiveness rate was as low as 10%16 . Another
study found that the vaccine was effective at reducing  the  rate
of  hospitalization  from pneumonia and also the rate of death in
elderly people with chronic lung diseases17 . Interestingly, Tak‐
sler  et  al.18  found  an inverse relationship between influenza
vaccine coverage in adults aged between 18 and 64 years  and  in‐
fluenza‐related  illness  in  the  older  population (>= 65years)
which can be explained by reduced transmission in the  community.
Since  there  is  no effective treatment or vaccine available for
COVID‐19 to this date, other measures have to be taken to  reduce
the  morbidity  and mortality of this disease. Public health mea‐
sures like isolation, quarantine, and social distancing are being
used  worldwide to contain outbreaks and reduce the spread of the
disease19 . These measures are key not only to mitigate the virus
transmission  but  also to better manage healthcare resources20 .
A plausible conjecture is that reducing the rate of  chronic  and
acute  respiratory  comorbidities in high‐risk populations, could
in turn lead to a reduction in the complications and deaths asso‐
ciated  with  COVID‐19.  Based  on this, it could be hypothesized
that routine influenza vaccination may be associated  with  lower
morbidity and mortality from COVID‐19 because immunized individu‐
als will have a lower rate of respiratory complications from  in‐
fluenza,  and  thus  will have a better baseline health have been
recently reported among army  personnel  who  received  influenza
vaccination21 . Therefore, it is possible that influenza vaccina‐
tion may increase the susceptibility to SARS‐CoV2 infection,  and
thus be associated with increased COVID‐19 morbidity, and mortal‐
ity, through immune‐mediated mechanisms  like  antibody‐dependent
enhancement (ADE)22 .  Motivated by these observations, we inves‐
tigate whether influenza vaccination coverage is associated  with
COVID‐19  mortality, and, if so, in which direction. To this end,
we analyze COVID‐19 mortality rate and influenza vaccination cov‐
erage  in  the  United  States (US) at the county level. While an
area‐level association can  only  provide  preliminary  evidence,
this  issue  requires urgent attention, and the data we collected
is the most effective in shedding light on it at  this  time.  In
our  analysis, we take great care to adjust for important social,
economic, and health determinants, to mitigate the intrinsic lim‐
itation of observational studies based on aggregated data.  Mate‐
rials and Methods Social,  economic,  demographic,  and  COVID‐19
variables  To  evaluate  the  impact  of influenza vaccination on
COVID‐19 mortality, we collected and analyzed data on vaccination
coverage, COVID‐19 mortality, and other important social, econom‐
ic, and health variables from the United States of America  (US).
The  cumulative  number of COVID‐19 cases and deaths were consid‐
ered until June 10, 2020.  which aggregates and combines data re‐
ported  by  national  and state sources. Up to date statistics on
COVID‐19 testing  for  that  aggregates  metrics  from  different
sources regarding the COVID‐19 epidemic in the United States. All
these statistics include cases in which  the  presence  of  SARS‐
CoV‐2  was  laboratory‐confirmed, and others in which it was pre‐
sumed and considered the probable cause of death23  .  For  Rhode
Island, the JHU repository reported deaths only at the state lev‐
el.  older, medical conditions, and tobacco use (year 2017)  were
obtained from the Center of Medicare Disparity Office of composi‐
tion, gender, race, age, and poverty levels (year 2018)  in  each
US county were retrieved from the Census Bureau Data and software
availability. All data used in this study,  along  with  detailed
information     about     data     sources,     are     available
com/c1au6i0/covid19_influenza. All data pre‐processing  and  sta‐
tistical  analyses  in this study were performed using the R pro‐
gramming language25 , and libraries from the  tidyverse  suite26,
27  .   Inclusion criteria. Information was available for a total
of 3243 counties across the 50 states  and  the  Washington  D.C.
district, between January 22, 2020 and June 10, 2020. For a total
of 1219 COVID‐19 deaths, the county of the deceased was  unknown.
Those  deaths  were omitted from the analysis since also informa‐
tion regarding the variable of interest and the confounders  were
not  available. As of the last day of observation, a total of 206
counties did not report any confirmed cases. To limit the  impact
of  limited  SARS‐CoV‐2  community  circulation  and  exposure on
COVID‐19 mortality, only counties with at least  10  include  the
duration  of  the  outbreak  (in  the  form of the number of days
elapsed since the first reported COVID‐19 case)  among  the  con‐
founding  variables.  For all other variables, we used the latest
available year information, as summarized below.  Potential  Con‐
founders Overall, the initial set of variables related to popula‐
tion demographics, clinical and territory character‐  istics  was
large  (300). In our analyses, therefore, we selected representa‐
tive variables from each important category, and  avoided  highly
correlated  pairs. Specifically, the following variables were in‐
cluded in our models: 1. Household‐related  variables:  a)  %  of
family  households, b) % of families with a single parent, and c)
% of households with access to internet. Note that  a  family  is
defined  by  the US Census as consisting of a householder and one
or more other people living in the same household who are related
to the householder by birth, marriage, or adoption.  2. Socioeco‐
nomic‐ and healthcare‐related variables:  a)  median  income,  b)
hospital  beds  per  person,  c) number of COVID‐19 tests (at the
state level), d) number of days since  the  first  case  in  that
county.   3.  Education‐related variables: (a) % of people with a
bachelor degree.  4. Race‐related variables (% of people  in  the
population  of  the  following  races):  a)  Asian,  b)  Black or
African‐American, c) Latino or Hispanic, d) Native  American,  e)
Caucasian  or  White, f) other races, g) belonging to two or more
races.  5. Demographic variables: a) % of people 65‐year  of  age
or  older,  b)  median age, c) sex ratio (males per 100 females),
and d) child dependency ratio (ratio between population under  18
years  and  population  18‐to‐64).  6. Medical conditions or dis‐
eases (% of people 65‐year of age or older with): a) dementia, b)
asthma,  c)  atrial fibrillation, d) breast cancer, e) colorectal
cancer, f) lung cancer,  g)  obstructive  pulmonary  disease,  h)
chronic  kidney  disease,  i)  depression,  j) diabetes, k) heart
failure, l) hypertension, m) ischemic heart disease, n)  obesity,
o)  rheumatoid arthritis p) stroke and transient ischemic attack,
and q) tobacco use.  7. Environmental variables: a) fine particu‐
late matter (g/m2 , average of years 2000 to 2016), b) winter and
summer temperature, and c) winter and summer humidity.  Statisti‐
cal Modeling Generalized linear model. We are interested in esti‐
mating the change in the COVID‐19 mortality rate associated  with
a  change  in the county‐level influenza vaccination coverage. To
this end, we used a quasi‐Poisson regression with the  number  of
deaths from COVID‐19 as the response variable, the influenza vac‐
cination coverage in people 65‐year of age and older as an  inde‐
pendent variable, and the population size of each area as offset.
We calculated the mortality rate ratio  (MRR)  using  the  the  R
package  oddratios28  .  The MRR represents the ratio of COVID‐19
mortality corresponding to an increase of 10%  in  the  influenza
vaccination  coverage. We chose population mortality, in contrast
to mortality among the infected population, to remove the  effect
of  inconsistent  COVID‐19 testing policies across areas. We con‐
trolled for potential confounding both via generalized propensity
scores and direct adjustment, as described next.  Confounding ad‐
justment with generalized propensity score. We estimated a gener‐
alized propensity score (PS) model for county‐level rates of vac‐
cination over 65‐year of age by regressing the logit of influenza
vaccination  coverage  on selected confounding variables (see Po‐
tential Confounders above). The propensity score is  a  balancing
factor that allows to correct for the potentially unequal distri‐
bution of explanatory and confounding variables across levels  of
exposure2931 . In our main analyses, we stratified the propensity
score into quintiles, and then used these  as  a  factor  in  the
quasi‐Poisson  regression  analysis.   We performed this analysis
with and without state‐specific fixed effects.  Additionally,  we
employed a Poisson mixed model in which the state was included as
random factor to control for state differences. We also used  the
PS  quintiles  to perform a fully stratified analysis. Lastly, we
repeated the analysis by including the propensity score as a lin‐
ear  term  (see  secondary analyses).  Direct confounding adjust‐
ment. As an alternative, we also modeled the effect of  immuniza‐
tion  coverage  on  COVID‐19  mortality by directly adjusting for
confounding variables via linear terms in the  quasi‐Poisson  re‐
gression.  To  select  a  parsimonious  number  of potential con‐
founders, we clustered candidate variables based on their  corre‐
lation with each other households, b) rate of hospital beds, c) %
of people with asthma, d) % of people with breast cancer, e) % of
people with lung cancer, f) % of people with COPD, g) % of people
with hypertension, h) median income, i)  summer  temperature,  j)
summer  humidity, k) winter temperature, l) winter humidity, m) %
of people >= 65 years old, n) sex ratio, and o) days passed since
the  first case.  Secondary analyses: Dependency on counties with
highest and lowest infection rates. Counties with  extremely  low
or  high numbers of confirmed cases (and deaths) might have undue
leverage on statistical estimates. To explore sensitivity of  our
results,  we  repeated the analysis by requiring a larger minimum
number of confirmed cases for inclusion  in  the  model  (ranging
from  10  to 100 in increments of 10). Also, since New York State
has the highest number  of  confirmed  cases  (and  deaths)  from
COVID‐19  in  the US, we repeated the analysis after removing all
53 New York State counties. Finally, since we noticed that for 46
counties,  no  deaths  were  reported despite the large number of
cases (i.e., exceeding 100), we hypothesized that different  cri‐
teria  could  have been used to record COVID‐19 related deaths in
these counties. We therefore repeated our analysis including only
the  counties  with at least one death.  Secondary analyses: Sta‐
bility over time. Our analyses are somewhat arbitrarily based  on
the  time  window  ending  on June 10. As information on COVID‐19
continues to accrue  results  may  evolve.  To  assess  stability
across  time  of  our estimated effects, we repeated the analyses
with the data available at different  points  over  approximately
two months.  Independent Verification: Exposure to air pollution.
Levels of airborne fine particulate matter (PM2.5 ) have been re‐
ported  to contribute to COVID‐19 mortality24 , based on analyses
sharing much of the same data structure and methodology with what
done  here.  To  provide  an independent verification of our data
collection and analysis pipeline, we repeated our analysis  using
chronic exposure to fine particulate matter (PM2.5 ) as an alter‐
native exposure, and  including  influenza  vaccination  coverage
among  the possible confounding variables. We were able to repro‐
duce the reported effect of  PM2.5  exposure  on  COVID‐19  death
rate.   Social,  economic, demographic population characteristics
and COVID‐19 outcomes in the US A total of 2034 counties were in‐
cluded in the analysis. The median influenza vaccination coverage
in people  65‐year of age is 45%. The COVID‐19 mortality rate did
not  differ substantially between counties where vaccination cov‐
erage was above the median (20.5  52 sd), compared to those where
it  was below (17.3  31.7 sd). Counties with lower influenza‐vac‐
cination coverage tend to have a lower level of education and in‐
come, and to have a higher percentage of Black and Latino popula‐
tions.  In contrast, counties with  higher  vaccination  coverage
tend  to  be  more  affluent, and to have an higher percentage of
white between counties with different vaccination coverage.  Vac‐
cination coverage Number of counties Death rate (per 100,000 peo‐
ple) Confirmed case rate (per  100,000  people)  Number  of  days
since the first case % family households % families with only one
parent % with bachelor degree % with  Internet  %  median  income
($1,000)   Rate  of  hospital  beds  (per  1000  people)  %  with
Alzheimers disease % with asthma %  with  atrial  fibrillation  %
with  breast cancer % with colorectal cancer % with lung cancer %
with obstructive pulmonary disease % with chronic kidney  disease
% with depression % with diabetes % with heart failure % with hy‐
pertension % with ischemic heart disease % with  obesity  %  with
rheumatoid arthritis % with stroke or transient ischemic attack %
using tobacco Average PM2.5 (g/m3 )  Average  summer  temperature
(K)  Average summer humidity Average winter temperature (K) Aver‐
age winter humidity Median age % of people 65 years  of  age  Sex
ratio (males per 100 females) Child dependency ratio % Island na‐
tive % two or more races related metrics used  in  the  analyses.
Data are presented overall and stratified by counties with vacci‐
nation coverage below and above  the  Influenza  vaccination  and
COVID19  mortality Primary analyses. Several variables had a sig‐
nificant effect on influenza vaccination coverage, including  de‐
mographic  factors  like  the  race and education level, together
with a number of chronic health conditions like diabetes and  hy‐
pertension  (see factor after stratification into quintiles. Such
generalized linear model produced a significant negative  coeffi‐
cient  for  influenza after controlling for confounding variables
that could affect both the proportion of  vaccinated  individuals
and  mortality  in an rates. Specifically, for every 10% increase
in influenza vaccination coverage, there is a 28% decrease in the
rate of mortality being stronger in the counties where the vacci‐
nation coverage is higher. Indeed, when we analyzed the link  be‐
tween  vaccination coverage and COVID‐19 mortality within each US
county group as defined by the propensity  score  quintiles,  the
effect was from COVID‐19 associated with a 10% increase in vacci‐
nation coverage. Results shown are for the primary analysis  per‐
formed  on all counties with more than 10 cases, and for the sec‐
ondary analyses where distinct  thresholds  for  inclusion  where
used  (respectively, more than 50 and 100 confirmed cases).  Vac‐
cination effect Corrected by PS quintiles Corrected by continuous
PS  Corrected  by  PS quintiles and US state (fixed effects) Cor‐
rected by PS quintiles and US state (mixed  effects)  study.  Ef‐
fects  are reported for all models fitted to capture the link be‐
tween influenza vaccination coverage and COVID mortality  in  the
US.   Each  line  represents  a  distinct  model  type or adjust‐
ment.Vaccination refers  to  county‐level  influenza  vaccination
coverage in people >= 65 years.  PS refers to vaccination propen‐
sity score. All the models are  quasi‐Poisson  with  t‐statistic,
with  exception of the mixed effects one which is a Poisson model
with Z‐score statistic.  Secondary analyses. We further evaluated
the  robustness  of this effect using alternative approaches. In‐
cluding the propensity score as a linear term in the  quasi‐Pois‐
son model yielded similar results (estimate = 5.65, t = 4.66, p <
0.01, d f = 2031, access and testing policies at the state  level
using  a  fixed  effects model (estimate = 5.64, t = 9.16, p < 2e
16, d f = 2027, directly as described in the methods section. The
results  showed that the effect of influenza vaccination remained
significant The effect of vaccination coverage on  COVID‐19  mor‐
tality  in  the  US  was  not significant after removing New York
state from the analysis (estimate = 0.26, t = 0.406, p = 0.69,  d
f  =  1975)  but it was significant when adjusting for propensity
score By repeating our analysis including only the counties  with
at  least  one death, the effect of vaccination remained signifi‐
cant indicating that it is not affected by the counties with zero
mortality  (estimate = 3.10,t = 2.51, p = 0.01, d f = 1556).  Fi‐
nally, increased air levels of particulate matter  (PM2.5  )  was
found  to  be  associated  with  a  higher  number of deaths from
COVID‐19 (estimate = 0.09, t = 3.33, p < 0.01, d f  =  2028),  as
previously  reported24  .  Overall,  the  results  from all these
analyses were consistent, further confirming that  the  link  be‐
tween  influenza  vaccination and reduced mortality from COVID‐19
is robust.  The main motivation for our study was to gather  pre‐
liminary  evidence  about a possible connection between influenza
vaccination in the elderly population and the risk  of  mortality
from COVID‐19. On one hand, seasonal influenza infection is asso‐
ciated with the development of several respiratory complications,
especially  in the elderly14 . On the other hand, a recent report
points to increased odds  of  non‐SARS  coronaviruses  infections
among  army personnel who received influenza vaccination21 . This
acquired by natural  influenza  infection,  which  would  protect
against  infection  by other viruses32, 33 .  Public county‐level
data in the U.S.A. provide a platform to begin exploring this is‐
sue. We quantified the county‐level association between influenza
vaccine coverage in people older than 65 years  and  COVID‐19‐re‐
lated  deaths  in these data.  We focused on people aged 65 years
and older since this age group is more susceptible  to  influenza
complications and thus annual influenza vaccination is recommend‐
ed for them. This age group also has a higher mortality rate  and
a greater risk for developing severe complications from COVID‐19,
compared to the younger population10 . In our analyses,  we  con‐
trolled  for a wide array of potential confounding variables, in‐
cluding population density, social and economic variables, educa‐
tion, chronic medical conditions, and other important demographic
and environmental factors.  Our results suggest  a  reduction  in
COVID‐19  mortality  associated with higher influenza vaccination
rates in the elderly  population.  Specifically,  we  found  that
overall, a 10% increase in vaccination coverage was associated on
average with a statistically  significant  28%  decrease  in  the
COVID‐19 death rate. Our findings suggest that influenza vaccina‐
tion can play a protective role in COVID‐19, and that  additional
confirmatory studies at the individual level are urgently needed.
This conclusion is robust to several variations of our analytical
techniques.  We varied the time frame considered, and our thresh‐
old for inclusion of counties with low exposure to SARS‐CoV‐2. We
also   investigated  systematically  several  variations  in  the
methodology used for adjusting for potential confounding factors.
Among  the  analyses  we considered is complete stratification by
quintiles of the propensity score. This  analysis  provides  five
However,  the  effects  within  the strata differ, with groups of
counties with higher generalized  propensity  scores  manifesting
higher  effects.  Our  propensity score reflect a large number of
potential confounders, many of which have  an  important  effect.
Thus,  further analyses are needed to shed light on the potential
sources of this heterogeneity. Generally speaking,  however,  our
analysis considers COVID‐19 mortality per inhabitant, and thus it
is possible that higher county‐level  vaccination  rates  may  by
themselves  provide  control of mortality via herd immunity.  Our
area‐level association is consistent with  a  protective  effect,
which  can  be  explained  by the vaccines effect of reducing the
rate of hospitalization and severe pulmonary complications in the
elderly. Evidence suggests that the vaccine benefit is greater in
people with high‐risk respiratory  conditions  like  chronic  ob‐
structive  pulmonary  disease34  and  asthma35 . Furthermore, in‐
fluenza vaccination was found to have a protective effect against
cardiovascular  events36  ,  confirming  previous  findings  that
linked influenza infection to increased rate  of  hospitalization
and death from myocardial infarction37, 38 .  A complementary ex‐
planation for a putative protective effect is  that  unvaccinated
individuals  are  at risk of persistent viral infections, leading
to a decline in T‐cell diversity which in turn impairs the immune
response against other pathogens including SARS‐CoV‐239, 40 . In‐
fluenza vaccination, on the other hand, does not induce a strong,
virus‐specific  CD8  T‐cell immune response, as seen with natural
infection41, 42 , and while this is considered a major  disadvan‐
tage  of  inactivated influenza vaccines, it may be beneficial in
clearing SARS‐CoV‐2 infection,  as  vaccinated  individuals  will
have  more  T‐cell diversity (and thus Importantly, the influenza
virus has been shown to induce apoptosis and impair the cytotoxic
effect  of  natural  killer (NK) cells4345 , ultimately impairing
the host immune defense mechanisms against other  pathogens,  in‐
cluding potentially SARS7/17 CoV‐2, especially in the acute phase
of the disease. Additionally, consistently unvaccinated individu‐
als are more likely to have a higher proportion of influenza‐spe‐
cific resident memory T‐cells (TRM ) in their  lungs,  which  are
highly  proliferative  and  highly productive of inflammatory cy‐
tokines46, 47 . This, in turn, might be associated with the exag‐
gerated  inflammatory  response and severe Acute Respiratory Dis‐
tress Syndrome (ARDS) seen in some COVID‐19 patients48 . Further‐
more,  the  Influenza A virus has been recently shown to up‐regu‐
late ACE2 receptors in the lung  alveolar  cells49  ,  suggesting
that  a  recent  influenza infection can potentially lead to more
severe pulmonary complications from COVID‐19,  in  light  of  the
fact  that these same receptors are used by SARS‐CoV‐2 for cellu‐
lar entry.  We regard ours as an urgent, but  preliminary,  study
and  acknowledge  several limitations. Important potentially con‐
founding variables include the socioeconomic levels,  quality  of
healthcare,  and  the lack of uniform death reporting approaches.
While our covariates allow to control for some of these confound‐
ing  factors,  more  systematic  and accurate data collection ap‐
proaches would improve the reliability of analysis such as  ours.
An  important  limitation  is  that we could only control for the
number of tests performed at the state level, since testing  data
were  not  available for each county. Furthermore, testing avail‐
ability and recommendations, especially in the initial  phase  of
the  pandemic,  varied  between states. We tried to mitigate this
issue by using the total population in the county as  the  offset
in  our  models, rather than the total number of confirmed cases.
Since the number of performed tests can have an important  impact
on  the  number  of reported cases, we decided not to explore the
effect of influenza vaccination on SARS‐CoV‐2 reported  infection
rates. We were also unable to stratify and analyze COVID‐19 death
rate by age group, because this information  was  not  available.
Similarly, in our study, we could not take into account the vari‐
ability in vaccine formulation and in vaccine efficacy, which de‐
pends  on  the predominant circulating strains, because this kind
of data was not reported.  Based  on  the  information  currently
available,  it  is unclear whether the observed negative associa‐
tion with COVID‐19 mortality could also be observed  also  if  we
considered  natural  influenza  infection  as  the  exposure, and
whether vaccinations against other respiratory pathogens or other
diseases  can  confer  any protection. In this regard, it was re‐
cently proposed that live attenuated vaccines, by stimulating the
innate  immunity,  could  provide  transient  protection  against
COVID‐1950 . It is also important to underscore that COVID‐19 may
be  accompanied  by innate immune response suppression51 , there‐
fore further suggesting that vaccination could  also  be  benefi‐
cial,  by boosting innate immunity.  Finally, an important poten‐
tial confounder not captured in our dataset concerns the  use  of
other  drugs.  Recent studies have proposed a potential effect of
some  drugs  including  statins   and   anti‐hypertensives   like
ACEIs/ARBs  on  COVID‐19  mortality in the elderly population52 ;
however, these potential effects are still not confirmed and need
further investigation.  Although many important confounding vari‐
ables have been taken into account  in  our  analyses,  there  is
still  a  strong  need  to  go  beyond aggregated data to perform
analyses at the individual level.  These  studies  would  provide
much  more robust evidence of a possible protective effect of in‐
fluenza vaccination on COVID‐19 mortality, and also  help  deter‐
mine  the  underlying biological If an effect consistent with our
analysis was confirmed in individual  level  analyses,  it  would
justify a more aggressive and targeted influenza vaccination pol‐
icy in the elderly population and their caregivers, to reduce the
rates  of  hospitalization, severe respiratory complications, and
deaths from COVID‐19. This would be of paramount importance given
the  paucity  of  effective treatment or vaccine for COVID‐19 and
the extreme pressure on healthcare systems.  1. Max Roser, H.  R.
& Ortiz‐Ospina, E. Coronavirus disease (covid‐19)  statistics and
research. Our World Data (2020).  Early transmission dynamics  in
wuhan,  china, of novel coronavirusinfected pneumonia.  2. Li, Q.
et al.  3. Rothe, C. et al. Transmission of  2019‐ncov  infection
from an asymptomatic contact in germany. N Engl J Med 382, 4. Yu,
P., Zhu, J., Zhang, Z., Han, Y. & Huang, L. A familial cluster of
infection  associated with the 2019 novel coronavirus 5. Wu, Z. &
McGoogan, J. M. Characteristics of and Important Lessons From the
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID‐19) Outbreak in China: Summary of
a Report of 72314 Cases From the Chinese Center for Disease  Con‐
trol and Prevention.  6. Guan, W.‐J. et al. Clinical characteris‐
tics of coronavirus disease 2019 in china.  N  Engl  J  Med  382,
17081720  (2020).  7. Wang, D. et al. Clinical characteristics of
138 hospitalized patients with  2019  novel  coronavirus‐infected
pneumonia  in wuhan, china. JAMA 323, 10611069 (2020).  8. Huang,
C. et al. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019  novel
coronavirus in wuhan, china. Lancet 395, 497506 9. Lechien, J. R.
et al. Olfactory and gustatory dysfunctions as a clinical presen‐
tation  of  mild‐to‐moderate  forms  of  the  coronavirus disease
(covid‐19): a multicenter european study. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryn‐
gol  111  (2020).   10.  Zhou, F. et al. Clinical course and risk
factors for mortality of adult inpatients with covid‐19 in wuhan,
china: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet 395, 10541062 (2020).
11. Richardson, S. et al. Presenting characteristics,  comorbidi‐
ties, and outcomes among 5700 patients hospitalized with covid‐19
in the new york city area. JAMA e206775 (2020).  12. Xing, Q.  et
al. Precautions are needed for covid‐19 patients with coinfection
of common respiratory pathogens. medRxiv 14. Keilman, L. J.  Sea‐
sonal influenza (flu). Nurs. Clin. North Am. 54, 227  243 (2019).
15. Hak, E. et al. Influence of High‐Risk Medical  Conditions  on
the  Effectiveness of Influenza Vaccination among Elderly Members
of 3 Large Managed‐Care Organizations.  Clin.  Infect.  Dis.  35,
370377 (2002).  16. Fry, A. M. et al. Modeling the effect of dif‐
ferent vaccine effectiveness estimates on the number of  vaccine‐
prevented  influenza‐associated hospitalizations in older adults.
Clin Infect Dis 59, 406409 (2014).  17. Nichol, K. L., Baken,  L.
&  Nelson,  A.  Relation between influenza vaccination and outpa‐
tient visits, hospitalization, and mortality in  elderly  persons
with  chronic  lung  disease.  Ann Intern Med 130, 397403 (1999).
18. Taksler, G. B., Rothberg, M. B. & Cutler, D.  M.  Association
of influenza vaccination coverage in younger adults with influen‐
za‐related illness in the elderly. Clin Infect Dis  61,  14951503
(2015).   19. Wilder‐Smith, A. & Freedman, D. O. Isolation, quar‐
antine, social distancing and community containment: pivotal role
20.  Matrajt,  L. & Leung, T. Evaluating the effectiveness of so‐
cial distancing interventions to delay or  flatten  the  epidemic
21.  Wolff, G. G. Influenza vaccination and respiratory virus in‐
terference among  department  of  defense  personnel  during  the
20172018  influenza season. Vaccine 38, 350  354 (2020).  23. Hy‐
attsville, M. National center for health statistics. guidance for
certifying  deaths  due  to  covid19.  available from 24. Wu, X.,
Nethery, R. C., Sabath, B. M., Braun, D. & Dominici, F.  Exposure
to  air  pollution  and  COVID‐19  mortality in Harbor Laboratory
Press.  R. & Gentleman, R: A Language for JOURNAL OF COMPUTATION‐
AL  AND  GRAPHICAL STATISTICS (1996).  26. R Core Team. R: A Lan‐
guage and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for
Statistical  Computing,  Vienna, 29. ROSENBAUM, P. R. & RUBIN, D.
B. The central role of  the  propensity  score  in  observational
studies for causal effects.  30. Austin, P. C. An introduction to
propensity score methods for reducing the effects of  confounding
in observational studies.  Multivar. Behav Res 46, 399424 (2011).
31. Brookhart, M. A. et al.  Variable  selection  for  propensity
score  models.  Am J Epidemiol 163, 11491156 (2006).  32. SUZUKI,
M., CAMACHO, A. & ARIYOSHI, K. Potential effect of  virus  inter‐
ference on influenza vaccine effectiveness estimates in test‐neg‐
ative designs. Epidemiol.  Infect.  142,  26422646  (2014).   33.
Cowling,  B. J. et al. Increased Risk of Noninfluenza Respiratory
Virus Infections Associated With Receipt of Inactivated Influenza
Vaccine.  Clin.  Infect.  Dis. 54, 17781783 (2012).  BMC Pulm Med
17, 79 (2017).  36. Udell, J. A. et al. Association  between  in‐
fluenza  vaccination and cardiovascular outcomes in high‐risk pa‐
tients: a meta‐analysis. JAMA 310, 17111720 (2013).  37.  Warren‐
Gash,  C.  et  al. Circulating influenza virus, climatic factors,
and acute myocardial infarction: a time series study  in  england
and  wales and hong kong. J Infect Dis 203, 17101718 (2011).  38.
Madjid, M. et al. Influenza epidemics and acute respiratory  dis‐
ease  activity  are  associated with a surge in autopsy‐confirmed
coronary heart disease death: results from 8 years  of  autopsies
in  34,892  subjects.  Eur Hear. J 28, 12051210 (2007).  39. Lam‐
bert, N. D., Ovsyannikova, I. G., Pankratz, V. S.,  Jacobson,  R.
M. & Poland, G. A. Understanding the immune response 40. Channap‐
panavar, R. et al. Dysregulated type i interferon and inflammato‐
ry  monocyte‐macrophage responses cause lethal pneumonia in sars‐
cov‐infected mice. Cell Host  Microbe  19,  181193  (2016).   41.
Grant, E. J. et al. Broad cd8(+) t cell cross‐recognition of dis‐
tinct influenza a strains in humans. Nat Commun 9, 5427 42. McEl‐
haney, J. E. et al. The immune response to influenza in older hu‐
mans: beyond immune senescence.  Immun. & ageing : I & A 17, 1010
(2020).   43.  Mao,  H. et al. Inhibition of human natural killer
cell activity by influenza virions and hemagglutinin. J. virology
84,  44.  Mao,  H.  et al. Influenza virus directly infects human
natural killer cells and induces cell apoptosis. J. virology  83,
45.  Denney, L. et al. Reduction of natural killer but not effec‐
tor cd8 t lymphocytes in three consecutive cases of severe/lethal
h1n1/09  influenza  a virus infection. PLoS One 5, e10675 (2010).
46. Purwar, R. et al. Resident memory t cells (t(rm))  are  abun‐
dant in human lung: diversity, function, and antigen specificity.
PloS one 6, e16245e16245 (2011).  47. Pizzolla,  A.  et  al.  In‐
fluenza‐specific  lung‐resident  memory t cells are proliferative
and polyfunctional and maintain  diverse  tcr  profiles.  The  J.
clinical  investigation 128, 721733 (2018).  48. Henderson, L. A.
et al. On  the  alert  for  cytokine  storm:  Immunopathology  in
covid‐19.  Arthritis  Rheumatol (2020).  49. Hui, K. P. Y. et al.
Tropism, replication competence, and innate immune  responses  of
the  coronavirus sars‐cov‐2 in 50. Chumakov, K., Benn, C. S., Aa‐
by, P., Kottilil, S. & Gallo, R. Can existing live vaccines  pre‐
vent  covid‐19?  Science 368, 51. Zheng, M. et al. Functional ex‐
haustion of antiviral lymphocytes in covid‐19 patients. Cell  Mol
Immunol  17,  533535, 52. De Spiegeleer, A. et al. The effects of
arbs, aceis and statins on clinical outcomes of  covid‐19  infec‐
tion  among  nursing  home residents. medRxiv 2020.05.11.20096347
(2020).  This publication was made possible through support  from
the  NIH‐NCI  grants P30CA006973 (L.M.).  L.M. conceived the idea
of the study. CZ wrote the code used to aggregate data  and  per‐
form  analysis. G.P. conducted the first analysis of the data and
identified the appropriate statistical models to use. E.C.  inde‐
pendently  validated the analysis. C.Z., COVID‐19 data up to June
10, 2020 were imported  using  the  JHU  repository.  Since  this
repository  does  not report Rhode Island COVID‐19‐related deaths
at the county level, that information was obtained from  the  NYT
repository  instead.  Counties with missing information regarding
the variable of interest or the confounders as well as those with
less  then 10 cases were not included in the analysis.  The final
dataset used for  the  main  analysis  comprises  2034  counties.
Shown is the coefficients and 95% CI of the influenza vaccination
coverage obtained in the quasi‐Poisson regression analysis  as  a
function  of together. From each cluster, we chose a single vari‐
able to be used as a covariate in the quasi‐Poisson model in  the
direct adjustment approach.  Family households Families with only
one parent With bachelor degree With Internet Ratio  of  hospital
beds  (per 100,000 people) Alzheimers disease Atrial fibrillation
Breast cancer Colorectal cancer Lung cancer  Chronic  obstructive
pulmonary  disease  Chronic kidney disease Heart failure Ischemic
heart disease Rheumatoid arthritis Tobacco use Median income Sum‐
mer temperature Summer humidity Winter temperature Winter humidi‐
ty Median age Sex ratio Child dependency Black race  Latino  race
White  race  Asian race Island native race Other race Two or more
races Total COVID‐19 tests Days since the first  case  variables.
The  propensity  score  was calculated by regressing the logit of
influenza vaccination coverage on the selected confounding  vari‐
ables.   Influenza  vaccination  in people >= 65 years regression
model using the number of deaths from  COVID‐19  as  the  outcome
variable, influenza vaccination coverage as the independent vari‐
able, and adjusting for propensity score quintiles. Total popula‐
tion  was  used as offset to the model.  Influenza vaccination in
people >= 65 years Propensity Score quasi‐Poisson regression mod‐
el  using the number of deaths from COVID‐19 as the outcome vari‐
able, influenza vaccination coverage as the independent variable,
and  adjusting for propensity score as continuous variable. Total
population was used as offset.  Influenza vaccination  in  people
>=  65  years  the  number of deaths from COVID‐19 as the outcome
variable, influenza vaccination coverage as the independent vari‐
able,  adjusting  for propensity score quintiles, and controlling
for State differences using fixed effect model.  Influenza vacci‐
nation  in people >= 65 years of deaths from COVID‐19 as the out‐
come variable, influenza vaccination coverage as the  independent
variable,  adjusting for propensity score quintiles, and control‐
ling for State differences by including State as a random factor.
1st Quintile Intercept 1st Quintile Immunization 2nd Quintile In‐
tercept 2nd Quintile  Immunization  3rd  Quintile  Intercept  3rd
Quintile  Immunization  4th Quintile Intercept 4th Quintile Immu‐
nization 5th Quintile Intercept 5th Quintile Immunization  strata
based  on their propensity scores quintile. Then, we fit a quasi‐
Poisson regression in each stratum using the number  of  COVID‐19
deaths  as  the outcome and influenza vaccination coverage as the
independent variable after adjusting for  the  propensity  score.
Shown  is  the intercept and coefficient for vaccination coverage
from the quasi‐Poisson model in each stratum.  Influenza vaccina‐
tion  (>  10  cases) Influenza vaccination (> 50 cases) Influenza
vaccination (> 100  cases)  Influenza  vaccination  (without  New
York)  distinct  quasi‐Poisson regressions in which the number of
counties included varies based on the minimum number of cases, or
in  which  New  York State counties were excluded. In each model,
the number of COVID‐19 deaths was used as  the  outcome  and  in‐
fluenza  vaccination  coverage  in  people  >=  65  together with
propensity score (continuous) were used as the independent  vari‐
ables. Total population was used as Influenza vaccination in peo‐
ple >= 65 years Family households Ratio  of  hospital  beds  (per
1000  people)  Breast cancer Lung cancer Chronic obstructive pul‐
monary disease Median income Summer temperature  Summer  humidity
Winter temperature Winter humidity Sex ratio Days since the first
case We clustered the 42 candidate variables based on their  cor‐
relation  with  each  other, then selected only one variable from
each cluster. The selected variables were used as linear terms in
the quasi‐Poisson model.









