Test  sensitivity  is  secondary to frequency and turnaround time
for COVID‐19 surveillance Daniel B. Larremore1,2 , Bryan  Wilder3
, Evan Lester6,5 , Soraya Shehata4,5 , James M. Burke6 , James A.
Hay7,8 , Milind Tambe3 , Michael J. Mina7,8,9,* , and  Roy  Park‐
er4,6,10,2,*  Public  Health  The COVID‐19 pandemic has created a
public health crisis. Because SARS‐CoV‐2 can spread from individ‐
uals  with  pre‐symptomatic, symptomatic, and asymptomatic infec‐
tions [1, 2, 3], the re‐opening of societies and the  control  of
virus  spread  will  be  facilitated  by robust surveillance, for
which virus testing will often be central. After infection, indi‐
viduals  undergo a period of incubation during which viral titers
are usually too low to detect, followed by an exponential  growth
of  virus,  leading  to a peak viral load and infectiousness, and
ending with declining viral levels and clearance [4].  Given  the
pattern  of viral load kinetics [4], we model surveillance effec‐
tiveness considering test sensitivities, frequency,  and  sample‐
to‐answer  reporting  time. These results demonstrate that effec‐
tive surveillance, including time to first detection and outbreak
control, depends largely on frequency of testing and the speed of
reporting, and is only marginally improved by high test sensitiv‐
ity.  We  therefore  conclude that surveillance should prioritize
accessibility, frequency, and sample‐to‐answer  time;  analytical
limits of detection should be secondary.  The reliance on testing
as a means to safely reopen societies has placed a microscope  on
the  analytical sensitivity of virus assays, with a gold‐standard
of quantitative real‐time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). These
assays have analytical limits of detection that are usually with‐
in around 103 viral RNA copies per ml (cp/ml) [5]. However,  qPCR
remains expensive and as a laboratory based assay often have sam‐
ple‐to‐result times of 24‐48 hours.  New  developments  in  SARS‐
CoV‐2  diagnostics have the potential to reduce cost significant‐
ly, allowing for expanded testing or greater frequency of testing
and  can  reduce turnaround time to minutes. These assays however
largely do not meet the gold standard for analytical sensitivity,
which  has  encumbered  translation of these assays for widescale
use [6].  Three features of the viral increase, infectivity,  and
decline  during  SARS‐CoV‐2  infection led us to hypothesize that
there might be minimal differences in effective surveillance  us‐
ing viral detection tests of different sensitivities, such as RT‐
qPCR with a limit of detection (LOD) at 103 cp/ml [5] compared to
often  cheaper  or  faster assays with higher limits of detection
(i.e., around 105 cp/ml) samples collected from patients display‐
ing  less than 106 N or E RNA cp/ml contain minimal or no measur‐
able infectious virus [7, 8, 9], either class of test should  de‐
tect individuals who are is likely due to (i) the fact that the N
and E RNAs are also present in abundant subgenomic mRNAs, leading
to  overestimation  of  the  number  of  actual  viral genomes by
100‐1000X [10], (ii) technical artifacts of RT‐PCR at Ct values >
35  due to limited template [11, 12], and (iii) the production of
during the exponential growth of the virus, the  time  difference
between  103 and 105 cp/ml is short, allowing only a limited win‐
dow in which only the more sensitive test could diagnose individ‐
uals.  For qPCR, this corresponds to the time required during vi‐
ral growth to go from Ct values of 40 to 34. While this time win‐
dow  for SARS‐CoV‐2 is not yet rigorously defined, for other res‐
piratory viruses such as influenza, and in ferret models of SARS‐
CoV‐2  transmission, it is on the order of a day [14, 15]. Final‐
ly, high‐sensitivity screening tests, when applied during the vi‐
ral  decline accompanying recovery, are unlikely to substantially
impact transmission because such individuals detected  have  low,
if any, infectiousness [10].  To examine how surveillance testing
would reduce the average infectiousness of individuals, we  first
modeled the viral loads and infectiousness curves of 10,000 simu‐
lated individuals using the predicted viral trajectories of SARS‐
CoV‐2  infections based on key features of latency, growth, with‐
in‐host viral kinetics, we calculated what  percentage  of  their
total  infectiousness  would be frequencies. Here, infectiousness
was taken to be proportional to the logarithm of  viral  load  in
excess  of  106  cp/ml (with alternative assumptions addressed in
Supplemental Materials), consistent  with  the  observation  that
pre‐symptomatic  patients  are  most infectious just prior to the
onset of symptoms [4], and evidence that the efficiency of  viral
transmission  coincides  with  peak  viral  loads, which was also
identified during the related 2003 SARS  outbreak  [16,  17].  We
considered  that 20% of patients would undergo symptomatic isola‐
tion near their peak viral load if they had not viral load  posi‐
tive  test  & dx returned days since exposure rel. infectiousness
infectiousness removed no test isolated &  removed  but  isolated
indiv. infectiousness arbitrary units log10 viral load diagnosed,
LOD 103 diagnosed, LOD 105 days since exposure no test  is  shown
with  LOD  thresholds  of  two tests, and a hypothetical positive
test on day 6, two days after peak viral load. 20 other  stochas‐
tically  generated  viral loads are shown to highlight trajectory
diversity (light grey; see Methods). (B) Relative  infectiousness
for the viral load shown in panel A pre‐test, totaling 31% (blue)
and post‐isolation, totaling 69% (black). (C)  Surveillance  pro‐
grams using tests at LODs of 103 and 105 at frequencies indicated
were applied to 10, 000  individuals  trajectories  of  whom  20%
would undergo symptomatic isolation near their peak viral load if
they had not been tested and isolated first. Total infectiousness
removed  during  surveillance (colors) and self isolation (hatch)
are shown for surveillance as indicated, relative to total infec‐
tiousness  with no surveillance or self‐isolation. (D) The impact
of surveillance on the infectiousness of 100 individuals is shown
for  each surveillance program and no testing, as indicated, with
each individual colored by test if their infection  was  detected
during  infectiousness  (medians, black lines) or colored blue if
their infection was missed by surveillance or  detected  positive
after  their  infectious  period (medians, blue lines). Units are
arbitrary and scaled to the maximum infectiousness of sampled in‐
dividuals.   been  tested  and isolated first, and 80% would have
sufficiently mild or no symptoms such that they would not isolate
unless  they were detected by surveillance testing. This analysis
demonstrated that there was little difference in averting  infec‐
tiousness between the two classes of test. Dramatic reductions in
total infectiousness of the individuals were observed by  testing
daily  or every third Because viral loads and infectiousness vary
across individuals, we also analyzed the impact of Above, we  as‐
sumed that each infection was independent. To investigate the ef‐
fects of surveillance testing strategies at the population level,
we  used  simulations to monitor whether epidemics were contained
or became uncontrolled, while varying the  frequencies  at  which
the  test was administered, ranging from daily testing to testing
every 14 days, and considering tests with LOD of 103  and  105  ,
analogous  to  RT‐qPCR and RT‐LAMP / rapid antigen tests, respec‐
tively. We used two different epidemiological  models  to  ensure
that important observations were independent of the specific mod‐
eling approach. The first model is a previously described  agent‐
based  model with total infections fully mixed model reduction in
R fully mixed model total infections agent based model  reduction
in R agent based model no test no test row) and agent based model
(bottom row) are affected by surveillance programs. (A,  B)  More
frequent  testing  reduces  the  effective reproductive number R,
shown as the percentage by which R0 is reduced, 100  (R0  R)/R0 .
Values of R were estimated from 50 independent simulations of dy‐
namics (see Methods). (C, D) Relative to no testing (grey  bars),
surveillance  suppresses  the  total number of infections in both
models when testing every day or every three days, but only  par‐
tially mitigates total cases for weekly or bi‐weekly testing. Er‐
ror bars indicate inner 95% quantiles of 50  independent  simula‐
tions  each.   both  within‐household  and age‐stratified contact
structure based on census microdata in a city  representative  of
New  York City [18], and initialized with 100 cases without addi‐
tional external infections. The second model is  a  simple  fully
mixed  model  representing a population of 20,000, to one new im‐
port per day. Individual viral loads were simulated for each  in‐
fection, and individuals who received a positive test result were
isolated, but contact tracing and monitoring was not included  to
more  conservatively  estimate  the impacts of surveillance alone
[19, 20]. Model details and parameters  are  fully  described  in
Methods.   We  observed that a surveillance program administering
either test with high frequency limited Methods  for  calculation
procedure) and by the total infections that persisted in spite of
different was found to be the primary driver of  population‐level
epidemic control, with only a small margin of improvement provid‐
ed by using a more sensitive test. Direct examination of  simula‐
tions  showed  that with no surveillance or biweekly testing, in‐
fections were uncontrolled, whereas surveillance  testing  weekly
with either LOD = 103 or 105 effectively attenuated surges of in‐
fections (examples The relationship between test sensitivity  and
the  frequency  of  testing required to control outbreaks in both
the fully mixed model and the agent‐based model generalize beyond
the examples shown in viral load test sample positive dx rel. in‐
fectiousness infectiousness removed days since exposure  awaiting
dx  but  isolated  isolated & removed indiv. infectiousness arbi‐
trary units log10 viral load no test daily diagnosed, LOD 103 di‐
agnosed, LOD 105 missed / caught late days since exposure no test
viral load trajectory is shown with LOD thresholds of two  tests,
and  a  hypothetical positive test on day 6, but with results re‐
ported on day 8. 20 other stochastically  generated  viral  loads
are  shown  to  highlight  trajectory  diversity (light grey; see
Methods). (B) Relative infectiousness for the viral load shown in
panel  A pretest (totaling 31%; blue) and post‐test but pre‐diag‐
nosis (totaling 32%; green), and  post‐isolation  (totaling  37%;
black).  (C) Surveillance programs using tests at LODs of 103 and
105 at frequencies indicated, and with results returned after  0,
1,  or 2 days (indicated by small text beneath bars) were applied
to 10, 000 individuals trajectories of whom 20% were  symptomatic
and  self‐isolated  after  peak  viral  load if they had not been
tested and isolated first. Total  infectiousness  removed  during
surveillance (colors) and self isolation (hatch) are shown, rela‐
tive to total infectiousness with no surveillance or  self‐isola‐
tion.  Delays substantially impact the fraction of infectiousness
removed. (D) The impact of surveillance with delays in  returning
diagnosis of 0, 1, or 2 days (small text beneath axis) on the in‐
fectiousness of 100 individuals is shown  for  each  surveillance
program  and  no testing, as indicated, with each individual col‐
ored by test if their infection was detected  during  infectious‐
ness  (medians,  black  lines) or colored blue if their infection
was missed by surveillance or diagnosed positive after their  in‐
fectious  period  (medians,  blue lines). Units are arbitrary and
scaled to the maximum infectiousness of sampled individuals.   at
LODs  of 103 , 105 , and 106 , and for testing ranging from daily
to every 14 days. For those, To address whether these finding are
sensitive  to this modeled relationship, we performed similar be‐
tween infectiousness and viral load.  An  important  variable  in
surveillance  testing  is the time between a tests sample collec‐
tion and the reporting of a diagnosis. To examine how time to re‐
porting affected epidemic control, we re‐analyzed both the reduc‐
tion in individuals infectiousness, as well as the  epidemiologi‐
cal  sim5 reduction in R agent based model total infections fully
mixed model dx delay no test daily total infections  agent  based
model  reduction  in R fully mixed model no test daily The effec‐
tiveness of surveillance programs are dramatically diminished  by
delays  in  reporting in both the fully‐mixed compartmental model
(top row) and agent based model (bottom row). (A, B)  The  impact
of  surveillance  every  day, 3 days, weekly, or biweekly, on the
reproductive number R, calculated as 100 (R0  R)/R0  ,  is  shown
for  LODs  103  and 105 and delays of 0, 1, or 2 days (small text
below axis). Values of R were estimated from 50 independent simu‐
lations  of dynamics (see Methods). (C, D) Relative to no testing
(grey bars), surveillance suppresses the total number  of  infec‐
tions  in both models when testing every day or every three days,
but delayed results lead to only partial mitigation of total cas‐
es, even for testing every day or 3 days. Error bars indicate in‐
ner 95% quantiles of 50 independent simulations each.   ulations,
comparing  the  results  of instantaneous reporting (reflecting a
rapid point‐of‐care assay), of viral spread  and  emphasize  that
fast  reporting  of results is critical in any surveillance test‐
ing.  These results also reinforce the relatively  smaller  bene‐
fits  of improved limits of detection.  Communities vary in their
transmission dynamics, due to difference in rates of imported in‐
fections  and in the basic reproductive number R0 , both of which
will influence the frequency and sensitivity with which  surveil‐
lance testing must occur. We performed two analyses to illustrate
this point.  First, we varied the rate of external  infection  in
our  fully mixed model, and confirmed that when the external rate
of infection is higher, more frequent surveillance is required to
prevent  outbreaks  and  C). This may be relevant to institutions
like college campuses or military bases wherein fre‐ quent class‐
room  setting  or dormitory living are likely to increase contact
rates. Thus, the specific strategy  for  successful  surveillance
will  depend  on  the  current community infection prevalence and
transmission rate.  Our results lead us to conclude that surveil‐
lance  testing  of  asymptomatic individuals can be used to limit
the spread of SARS‐CoV‐2. However, our findings are subject to  a
number  of limitations.  First, the sensitivity of a test may de‐
pend on factors beyond LOD, including manufacturer variation  and
improper clinical sampling [21], though the latter may be amelio‐
rated by different approaches to sample collection, such as sali‐
va‐based testing [22]. Second, our model assumed that no individ‐
uals would refuse testing. Both refusal and sampling‐driven  sen‐
sitivity  issues can be accounted for in estimates using a simple
formula (see Supplemental Text), but a more sophisticated  under‐
standing  of the relationship between sampling‐driven sensitivity
issues and viral load, for instance, would  more  accurately  ad‐
dress this limitation. Finally, the exact performance differences
between testing schemes will depend on whether  our  model  truly
captures viral kinetics and infectiousness profiles [4], particu‐
larly during the acceleration phase between exposure and peak vi‐
ral  load.  Continued clarification of these within‐host dynamics
would increase the impact and value of this, and other  [19,  20]
modeling  studies.  A critical point is that the requirements for
surveillance testing are distinct from clinical testing.   Clini‐
cal  diagnoses target symptomatic individuals, need high accuracy
and sensitivity, and are not limited by cost. Because they  focus
on  symptomatic  individuals,  those individuals can isolate such
that a diagnosis delay does not lead to additional infections. In
contrast,  results  from the surveillance testing of asymptomatic
individuals need to be returned quickly, since even a single  day
diagnosis  delay compromises the surveillance programs effective‐
ness. Indeed, at least for viruses with infection kinetics  simi‐
lar  to  SARS‐CoV‐2, we find that speed of reporting is much more
important than sensitivity, althoughmore sensitive testsare  nev‐
erthelesssomewhat  more effective.  The difference between clini‐
cal and surveillance testing highlights the need  for  additional
tests  to  be  approved and utilized for surveillance. Such tests
should not be held to the same degree of  SARS‐CoV‐2  assays.  We
suggest  that  the FDA, other agencies, or state governments, en‐
courage the development and use of alternative faster  and  lower
cost  tests  for  surveillance purposes, even if they have poorer
limits of detection. If  the  availability  of  point‐of‐care  or
self‐administered  surveillance  tests leads to faster turnaround
time or more frequent testing,  our  results  suggest  that  they
would  have  high  epidemiological  value.  Our modeling suggests
that some types of surveillance will subject some individuals  to
unnecessary  quarantine days. For instance, the infrequent use of
a sensitive test will not only identify (i) those with a low  vi‐
ral  load in the beginning of the infection, who must be isolated
to limit viral the infectious threshold [9, 10].  Isolating  this
second  group of patients will have no impact on viral spread but
will incur costs of isolation. The use of serology, repeat  test‐
ing  24 or 48 hours apart, or some other test, to distinguish low
viral load patients on the upslope of infection from those in the
recovery  phase  could  allow for more effective quarantine deci‐
sions.  grants NIH F32 AI145112 (James Burke), NIH  F30  AG063468
(Evan Lester), MURI W911NF17‐1‐0370 (Milind Tambe), an NIH direc‐
tors DP5 award 1DP5OD028145‐01 (Michael Mina), and [1] Melissa  M
Arons,  Kelly  M  Hatfield,  Sujan C Reddy, Anne Kimball, Allison
James, Jesica R Jacobs, Joanne Taylor, Kevin Spicer, Ana  C  Bar‐
dossy,  Lisa  P  Oakley, et al. Presymptomatic of Medicine, 2020.
[2] Desmond Sutton, Karin Fuchs, Mary Dalton, and  Dena  Goffman.
Universal  screening  for  [3]  Daniel  P  Oran and Eric J Topol.
Prevalence of asymptomatic SARS‐CoV‐2 infection: A [4] Xi He, Er‐
ic HY Lau, Peng Wu, Xilong Deng, Jian Wang, Xinxin Hao, Yiu Chung
Lau, Jessica Y Wong, Yujuan Guan, Xinghua Tan,  et  al.  Temporal
dynamics  in viral shedding and transmissibility of COVID‐19. Na‐
ture Medicine, 26(5):672675, 2020.  [5] Chantal BF Vogels, Ander‐
son  F  Brito, Anne Louise Wyllie, Joseph R Fauver, Isabel M Ott,
Chaney C Kalinich, Mary E Petrone, Marie‐Louise Landry,  Ellen  F
Foxman,  and  Nathan D Grubaugh. Analytical sensitivity and effi‐
ciency comparisons of SARS‐CoV‐2 qRT‐PCR assays.  medRxiv,  2020.
[6]  Coronavirus (COVID‐19) update: FDA informs public about pos‐
sible accuracy concerns with Abbott ID  NOW  Point‐of‐Care  Test.
[7]  Kendra  Quicke,  Emily  Gallichote,  Nicole  Sexton, Michael
Young, Ashley Janich, Gregory Gahm, Elizabeth J  Carlton,  Nicole
Ehrhart,  and Gregory D Ebel. Longitudinal surveillance for SARS‐
CoV‐2 RNA among asymptomatic staff in five colorado skilled nurs‐
ing  facilities:  Epidemiologic, virologic and sequence analysis.
medRxiv, 2020.  [8]  Roman  Wolfel,  Victor  M  Corman,  Wolfgang
Guggemos,  Michael  Seilmaier,  Sabine  Zange,  Marcel  A Muller,
Daniela Niemeyer, Terry C Jones, Patrick Vollmar, Camilla  Rothe,
et  al.   Virological  assessment  of  hospitalized patients with
COVID‐2019. Nature, 581(7809):465 [9] Bernard La Scola, Marion Le
Bideau,  Julien  Andreani,  Van  Thuan  Hoang,  Clio  Grimaldier,
Philippe Colson, Philippe Gautret, and Didier Raoult.  Viral  RNA
load  as determined by cell culture as a management tool for dis‐
charge of SARS‐CoV‐2 patients from infectious disease [10]  Soren
Alexandersen,  Anthony Chamings, and Tarka Raj Bhatta. SARS‐CoV‐2
genomic and subgenomic RNAs in diagnostic samples are not an  in‐
dicator of active replication. medRxiv, [11] Charles GB Caraguel,
Henrik Stryhn, Nellie Gagne, Ian R Dohoo, and  K  Larry  Hammell.
Selection  of a cutoff value for real‐time polymerase chain reac‐
tion results to fit a diagnostic [12] Adrian Ruiz‐Villalba, Eliz‐
abeth van Pelt‐Verkuil, Quinn D Gunst, Jan M Ruijter, and Maurice
JB van den Hoff. Amplification of nonspecific products in quanti‐
tative  polymerase chain reactions (qPCR). Biomolecular detection
and quantification, 14:718, 2017.  [14] Amber M Smith and Alan  S
Perelson. Influenza A virus infection kinetics: quantitative data
[15] Mathilde Richard, Adinda Kok,  Dennis  de  Meulder,  Theo  M
Bestebroer,  Mart  M Lamers, Nisreen MA Okba, Martje Fentener van
Vlissingen, Barry Rockx, Bart L Haagmans, Marion PG Koopmans,  et
al. SARS‐CoV‐2 is transmitted via contact and via the air between
ferrets. bioRxiv, 2020.  [16] Zhuang  Shen,  Fang  Ning,  Weigong
Zhou,  Xiong  He,  Changying Lin, Daniel P Chin, Zonghan Zhu, and
Anne Schuchat. Superspreading sars events, beijing, 2003.  Emerg‐
ing  Infectious  [17] Joseph Sriyal Malik Peiris, Chung‐Ming Chu,
Vincent Chi‐Chung Cheng, KS Chan, IFN Hung, Leo LM  Poon,  Kin‐Ip
Law,  BSF Tang, TYW Hon, CS Chan, et al. Clinical progression and
viral load in a community outbreak of coronavirus‐associated sars
pneumonia:  a  prospective study. The Lancet, 361(9371):17671772,
2003.  [18] Bryan Wilder, Marie Charpignon,  Jackson  A  Killian,
Han‐Ching Ou, Aditya Mate, Shahin Jabbari, Andrew Perrault, Angel
Desai, Milind Tambe, and Maimuna S  Majumder.  Modeling  between‐
population variation in COVID‐19 dynamics in hubei, lombardy, and
new york city.  Available at SSRN 3564800, 2020.   [19]  Corey  M
Peak,  Rebecca  Kahn, Yonatan H Grad, Lauren M Childs, Ruoran Li,
Marc Lipsitch, and Caroline O Buckee. Individual quarantine  ver‐
sus active monitoring of contacts for the mitigation of COVID‐19:
a modelling study. The Lancet Infectious  Diseases,  2020.   [20]
Adam J Kucharski, Petra Klepac, Andrew Conlan, Stephen M Kissler,
Maria Tang, Hannah Fry, Julia Gog, John Edmunds,  CMMID  COVID‐19
Working  Group,  et al. Effectiveness of isolation, testing, con‐
tact tracing and physical distancing on reducing transmission  of
SARSCoV‐2  in  different  settings.  medRxiv, 2020.  [21] Yicheng
Fang, Huangqi Zhang,  Jicheng  Xie,  Minjie  Lin,  Lingjun  Ying,
Peipei  Pang,  and  [22] Anne Louise Wyllie, John Fournier, Arnau
Casanovas‐Massana, Melissa Campbell, Maria Tokuyama, Pavithra Vi‐
jayakumar,  Bertie Geng, M Catherine Muenker, Adam J Moore, Chan‐
tal BF Vogels, et al. Saliva is more sensitive for SARS‐CoV‐2 de‐
tection  in COVID‐19 patients than nasopharyngeal swabs. Medrxiv,
2020.  [23] Stephen A Lauer, Kyra H Grantz, Qifang Bi, Forrest  K
Jones,  Qulu Zheng, Hannah R Meredith, Andrew S Azman, Nicholas G
Reich, and Justin Lessler. The incubation period  of  coronavirus
disease  2019  (COVID‐19) from publicly reported confirmed cases:
estimation  and  application.  Annals   of   internal   medicine,
172(9):577582,  2020.   [24]  Abishek  Chandrashekar, Jinyan Liu,
Amanda J Martinot, Katherine McMahan, Noe B Mercado,  Lauren  Pe‐
ter,  Lisa H Tostanoski, Jingyou Yu, Zoltan Maliga, Michael Neko‐
rchuk, et al.  SARS‐CoV‐2 infection protects against  rechallenge
in  rhesus  macaques.  Science,  2020.   [25]  Jingyou Yu, Lisa H
Tostanoski, Lauren Peter, Noe B Mercado, Katherine McMahan, Shant
H  Mahrokhian, Joseph P Nkolola, Jinyan Liu, Zhenfeng Li, Abishek
Chandrashekar, et al. Dna vaccine protection  against  SARS‐CoV‐2
in  rhesus  macaques. Science, 2020.  [26] Benny Borremans, Aman‐
dine Gamble, KC Prager, Sarah K Helman, Abby M  McClain,  Caitlin
Cox,  Van  Savage,  and James O Lloyd‐Smith. Quantifying antibody
kinetics and RNA shedding during  early‐phase  SARS‐CoV‐2  infec‐
tion.  medRxiv,  2020.  [27] Jeroen J.A. van Kampen, David A.M.C.
van de Vijver, Pieter L.A. Fraaij,  Bart  L.  Haagmans,  Mart  M.
Lamers,  Nisreen  Okba, Johannes P.C. van den Akker, Henrik Ende‐
man, Diederik A.M.P.J. Gommers, Jan J. Cornelissen,  Rogier  A.S.
Hoek,  Menno  M.  van  der Eerden, Dennis A. Hesselink, Herold J.
Metselaar,  Annelies  Verbon,  Jurriaan  E.M.   de   Steenwinkel,
Georgina I. Aron, Eric C.M. van Gorp, Sander van Boheemen, Jolan‐
da C. Voermans, Charles A.B. Boucher, Richard  Molenkamp,  Marion
P.G.  Koopmans,  Corine  Geurtsvankessel, and Annemiek A. van der
Eijk. Shedding of infectious virus in hospitalized patients  with
coronavirus  disease‐2019  (covid‐19):  duration and key determi‐
nants. medRxiv, [28] Hitoshi Kawasuji, Yusuke  Takegoshi,  Makito
Kaneda,  Akitoshi  Ueno,  Yuki  Miyajima, Koyomi Kawago, Yasutaka
Fukui, Yoshihiko Yoshida, Miyuki Kimura, Hiroshi Yamada,  et  al.
Viral  load  dynamics  in transmissible symptomatic patients with
COVID‐19. medRxiv, 2020.  [29] Kelvin Kai‐Wang To,  Owen  Tak‐Yin
Tsang,  Wai‐Shing  Leung,  Anthony Raymond Tam, TakChiu Wu, David
Christopher Lung, Cyril Chik‐Yan Yip, Jian‐Piao Cai,  Jacky  Man‐
Chun Chan, Thomas Shiu‐Hong Chik, et al. Temporal profiles of vi‐
ral load in posterior oropharyngeal saliva samples and serum  an‐
tibody responses during infection by SARS‐CoV‐2: an observational
cohort study. The Lancet Infectious  Diseases,  2020.   [30]  Jin
Yong  Kim, Jae‐Hoon Ko, Yeonjae Kim, Yae‐Jean Kim, Jeong‐Min Kim,
Yoon‐Seok Chung, Heui Man Kim, Myung‐Guk Han, So  Yeon  Kim,  and
Bum  Sik  Chin.  Viral  load  [31] Ai Tang Xiao, Yi Xin Tong, and
Sheng Zhang. Profile of  RT‐PCR  for  SARS‐CoV‐2:  a  preliminary
study  from  56  COVID‐19 patients. Clinical Infectious Diseases,
2020.  [32] Yang Liu, Li‐Meng Yan,  Lagen  Wan,  Tian‐Xin  Xiang,
Aiping  Le,  Jia‐Ming  Liu,  Malik  Peiris,  Leo LM Poon, and Wei
Zhang. Viral dynamics in mild and severe cases of  COVID‐19.  The
Lancet Infectious Diseases, 2020.  [33] Minnesota Population Cen‐
ter. Integrated public use microdata series, international:  Ver‐
sion  [34] Yang Liu, Rosalind Eggo, and Adam Kucharski. Secondary
attack rate and superspreading events for SARS‐CoV‐2. The Lancet,
2020.   [35] Kiesha Prem, Alex Cook, and Mark Jit. Projecting so‐
cial contact matrices in 152 countries using contact surveys  and
demographic  data. PLoS Computational Biology, 13(9):e1005697, no
surveillance test‐based  isolation  symptom‐based  isolation  LOD
103,  every  7  days  LOD 105, every 7 days LOD 105, every 3 days
number of infected individuals in a population of  N  =  20,  000
with  a constant rate of external infection set to 1/N per person
per day, i.e. around 1 imported case per day. Infections  (blue),
test‐based  isolation  (black), and symptom‐based isolation (red)
are shown for four scenarios, with R0 = 2.5. (A) No surveillance.
(B)  Weekly  testing at LOD 103 . (C) Weekly testing at LOD 105 .
(D) Testing every 3 days with LOD 105 . Note the variation in the
vertical  axis  scales.  The model is fully described in Methods.
fully mixed model effective repr. num. R  total  infections  days
between  tests agent based model effective repr. num. R total in‐
fections fully mixed model days between tests agent  based  model
days  between  tests days between tests model (top row) and agent
based model (bottom row) were simulated  (Methods)  with  various
test  frequencies,  ranging from daily to once every 14 days, and
with LODs of 103 , 105 , and 106 .  Modeling  results  show  mean
outcomes from 50 independent simulations at each point, expressed
as (A, B) total infections and (C, D) effective reproductive num‐
ber  R,  from  a baseline of R0 = 2.5. For the fully mixed model,
only secondary infections are shown,  excluding  imported  infec‐
tions. Total population sizes were N = 2  104 for the fully mixed
model and 8.4  106 for the agent based model. Dashed lines  indi‐
cate R = 1 for reference.  reduction in R agent based model total
infections fully mixed model dx delay no test daily total  infec‐
tions  agent based model reduction in R fully mixed model no test
daily viral load. Compare with threshold (binary)  infectiousness
in  Fig.  S4  and  log‐proportional  infectiousness in Fig 4. See
Methods.  reduction in R agent based model total infections fully
mixed  model  dx delay no test daily total infections agent based
model reduction in R fully mixed model no test  daily  below  106
and  equal  infectiousness for any viral load above 106 . Compare
with proportional infectiousness in Fig. S3 and  log‐proportional
infectiousness  in Fig 4. See Methods.  fully mixed model logpro‐
portional infectiousness agent based model logproportional infec‐
tiousness fully mixed model proportional infectiousness total in‐
fections total infections agent based model  proportional  infec‐
tiousness  total  infections  fully  mixed model threshold infec‐
tiousness days between tests 0 day delay fully mixed  model  pro‐
portional  infectiousness  days  between  tests agent based model
proportional infectiousness days between tests 0 day delay  fully
mixed  model threshold infectiousness days between tests days be‐
tween tests days between tests total infections agent based model
threshold  infectiousness  days  between  tests agent based model
logproportional infectiousness days between  tests  days  between
tests  fully  mixed model logproportional infectiousness days be‐
tween tests effective repr. num.  R  total  infections  effective
repr.  num. R 0 day delay days between tests effective repr. num.
R effective repr. num. R total infections effective repr. num.  R
days  between  tests  effective  repr.  num.  R agent based model
threshold infectiousness with various test  frequencies,  ranging
from  daily  to  once every 14 days, with LODs of 103 , 105 , and
106 , and with delays of 0, 1, 2, or 3 days, for  log‐proportion‐
al,  proportional,  and  threshold  infectiousness functions (see
Methods). Legends in panels A and B indicate LODs and delays, and
in‐plot annotations describe various conditions. Modeling results
show mean outcomes from 50 independent simulations at each point,
expressed  as  total infections and effective reproductive number
R, from a baseline of R0 = 2.5. For the fully mixed  model,  only
secondary  infections  are  shown, excluding imported infections.
Total population sizes were N = 2  104 for the fully mixed  model
and 8.4  106 for the agent based model. Dashed lines indicate R =
1 for reference.  total infections fully mixed model no test  to‐
tal  infections  fully  mixed model no dx delay 1 day delay 2 day
delay total infections agent based model no test  daily  no  test
daily  from the fully‐mixed simulation with a tripled rate of ex‐
ternal infection, i.e. 3/N per person per day. (B)  Results  from
the  fully mixed simulation with R0 doubled, i.e. R0 = 5. (C) Re‐
sults from the agent‐based simulation with R0 doubled, i.e. R0  =
5.  Viral Loads Viral loads were drawn from a simple viral kinet‐
ics model intended to capture (1) a variable latent period, (2) a
rapid growth phase from the lower limit of PCR detectability to a
peak viral load, and (3) a slower  decay  phase.  These  dynamics
were  based  on the following observations.  Latent periods prior
to symptoms have been estimated to be around 5  day  [23].  Viral
load appears to peak prior to symptom onset [4], and peaks within
2 days of challenge in a macaque model [24, 25], though it should
be  noted  that macaque challenge doses were high. Viral load de‐
creases 3 or more days before symptom onset [1, 30].  Peak  viral
loads  are  difficult  to measure due to lack of prospective sam‐
pling studies of individuals prior to exposure and infection, but
viral loads have been reported in the range of O(104 ) to O(109 )
copies per ml [8, 28, 29]. Viral loads appear to timing may  dif‐
fer depending on the degree or presence of symptoms [31, 32]. Fi‐
nally, we note that the general understanding of  viral  kinetics
may vary depending on the mode of sampling, as demonstrated via a
comparison between sputum and swab samples [8].  To mimic  growth
and  decay,  log10  viral  loads  were  specified by a continuous
piecewise linear crosses 103 , with t0  unif[2.5, 3.5],  measured
in  days since exposure. The second point represents the peak vi‐
ral load. Peak height was drawn Vpeak  unif[7, 11], and peak tim‐
ing was drawn with respect to the start of the exponential growth
phase, tpeak  t0  0.2 + gamma(1.8). The  third  point  represents
the  time  at which an individuals viral load crosses beneath the
106 threshold, at which point viral loads no longer cause  active
cultures  in laboratory experiments [7, 8, 9], and was drawn with
respect to peak timing, tf  tpeak  unif[5, 10].  In  simulations,
each  viral  loads parameters were drawn independently of others,
and the continuous function described here was evaluated  at  In‐
fectiousness F was assumed to be directly related to viral load V
in one of three ways. In the main text, each individuals relative
infectiousness  was  proportional log10 of viral loads excess be‐
yond 106 , i.e. F  log10 (V )  6. In the supplementary sensitivi‐
ty  analyses, we investigated two opposing extremes. To capture a
more extreme relationship between infectiousness and viral  load,
we considered F to be directly proportional to viral loads excess
above 106 , i.e. F 10log10 (V )6 = V  106 , and to capture a more
extreme  relationship,  but in the opposing direction, we consid‐
ered F to simply be a constant when viral  load  exceeded  106  ,
i.e. F  1V >106 . We call these three functions log‐proportional,
proportional, and threshold throughout the text and  log10  viral
load  (virions/mL)  viral load viral load (discrete time) control
points days since exposure, t sampled. Light grey lines  show  20
alternative  trajectories  to  illustrate  the diversity of viral
loads drawn from the simple model.  supplemental materials.   our
infectiousness  functions,  this  inferred relationship bears the
greatest similarity, over time, to  the  log‐proportional  infec‐
tiousness  function,  as visualized in Figs. 1 and 3. The propor‐
tional and threshold models therefore represent one of many types
of  sensitivity  analysis.  Results for those In all simulations,
the value of the proportionality constant implied by  the  infec‐
tiousness functions above was chosen to achieve the targeted val‐
ue of R0 for that simulation, and confirmed via simulation as de‐
scribed  below.  Disease Transmission Models Two models were used
to simulate SARS‐CoV‐2 dynamics, both based on a typical compart‐
mental  framework. The first model was a fully‐mixed model of N =
20, 000 individuals with all‐to‐all contact structure, zero  ini‐
tial infections, and a constant 1/N per‐person probability of be‐
coming infected from an external source. This model could  repre‐
sent, for instance, a large college campus with high mixing, sit‐
uated within a larger community  with  low‐level  disease  preva‐
lence.  The second model was an agent‐based model of N = 8.4 mil‐
lion agents representing the population and contact structure  of
New  York  City,  as  previously described [18]. Contact patterns
were based on a combination of  individual‐level  household  con‐
tacts  drawn  from census microdata and agestratified contact ma‐
trices which describe outside of household contacts.  This  model
was  initialized  with  100  initial  infections  and no external
sources of infection.  Both the fully‐mixed and agent‐based  mod‐
els  tracked  discrete  individuals who were Susceptible (S), In‐
fected (I), Recovered (R), Isolated (Q), and  Self‐Isolated  (SQ)
at each discrete one day timestep. Upon becoming infected (S  I),
a viral load trajectory V (t) was drawn which included  a  latent
period,  growth,  and  decay. Each day, an individuals viral load
trajectory was used to determine whether  their  diagnostic  test
would  be  positive if administered, as well as their infectious‐
ness to susceptible individuals. Based on a schedule  of  testing
each  person every D days, if an individual happened to be tested
on a day when their viral load exceeded the limit of detection  L
of the test, their positive result would cause them to isolate (I
Q), but with the possibility of a delay  in  turnaround  time.  A
fraction  1  f of individuals self‐isolate on the first day after
peak viral load, to mimic symptom‐driven isolation (I  SQ),  with
f  =  0.8 for the fully mixed model and f = 1 for the agent based
model. When an individuals viral load dropped below  103  ,  that
individual  recovered  (I,  Q,  SQ  R). Details follow.  Testing,
Isolation, and Sample‐to‐Answer Turnaround Times All  individuals
were tested every D days, so that they could be moved into isola‐
tion if their viral load exceeded the tests limit of detection  V
(t) > L. Each person was deterministically tested exactly every D
days , but testing days were drawn uniformly at random such  that
not  all  individuals were tested on the same day. To account for
delays in returning test results, we included a  sample‐to‐answer
turnaround  time  T  , meaning that an individual with a positive
test on day t would isolate on day t + T .  Transmission, Popula‐
tion  Structure,  and  Mixing Patterns: Fully‐mixed model Simula‐
tions were initialized with all individuals susceptible, S = N  .
Each  individual  was chosen to be symptomatic independently with
probability f , and each individuals first test day (e.g. the day
of  the  week that their weekly test would occur) was chosen uni‐
formly at random between 1 and  D.  Relative  infectiousness  was
scaled  up  or down to achieve the specified R0 in the absence of
any testing policy, but inclusive of any  assumed  self‐isolation
of  symptomatics.   In  each timestep, those individuals who were
marked for testing that day were tested, and a counter  was  ini‐
tialized to T , specifying the number of days until that individ‐
ual received their results.  Next, individuals whose test results
counters  were  zero were isolated, I  Q. Then, symptomatic indi‐
viduals whose viral load had declined relative  to  the  previous
day  were  self‐isolated, I SQ. Next, each susceptible individual
was spontaneously (externally) infected independently with proba‐
bility  1/N  , S  I. Then, all infected individuals contacted all
susceptible individuals, with  the  probability  of  transmission
based  on that days viral load V (t) for each person and the par‐
ticular infectiousness function, described above, S  I.  To  con‐
clude  each  time  step, individuals viral loads and test results
counters were advanced, with those whose  infectious  period  had
completely  passed moved to recovery, I, Q, SQ  R.  Transmission,
Population Structure, and Mixing Patterns: Agent‐based model  The
agent‐based  model  added viral kinetics and testing policies (as
described above) to an existing model for SARS‐CoV‐2 transmission
in  New York City. A full description of the agent‐based model is
available [18]; here we  provide  an  overview  of  the  relevant
transmission dynamics.  Simulations were initialized with all in‐
dividuals susceptible, except for 100 initially infected individ‐
uals,  S  = N  100. As in the fully‐mixed model, each individuals
test day was chosen uniformly at random and relative  infectious‐
ness  was scaled to achieve the specified R0 .  In each timestep,
those individuals who were marked for testing that day were test‐
ed, and a counter was initialized to T , specifying the number of
days until that individual received their results.   Next,  indi‐
viduals  whose  test  results counters were zero were isolated, I
Q. There was no selfisolation in this model (and accordingly, the
model did not label individuals as symptomatic or Then, transmis‐
sion from infected individuals  to  susceptible  individuals  was
simulated  both  within  and outside households. To model within‐
household transmission, each individual had a set of other  indi‐
viduals  comprising  their household. Household structures, along
with the age of each individual, were sampled from census  micro‐
data  for  New  York City [33]. The probability for an infectious
individual to infect each of their household members each day was
determined by scaling the relative infectiousness values to match
the estimated secondary attack rate for close household  contacts
previously  reported  in  case  cluster studies [34].  Outside of
household transmission was simulated using age‐stratified contact
matrices,  which  describe  the expected number of daily contacts
between an individual in a given age group and those in each oth‐
er  age  group.  Each  infectious  individual of age i drew Pois‐
son(Mij ) contacts with individuals in age group j,  where  M  is
the  contact  matrix. The contacted individuals were sampled uni‐
formly at random from age group j. We use a  contact  matrix  for
the United States estimated by [35]. Each contact resulted in in‐
fection, S  I, with probability proportional to the relative  in‐
fectiousness  of  the  infected individual on that day, scaled to
obtain the specified value of R0 .  To conclude each  time  step,
individuals  viral loads and test results counters were advanced,
with those whose infectious period had completely passed moved to
recovery,  I, Q  R.  Calibration to achieve targeted R0 and esti‐
mation of R As a consistency check, each simulations R0 was esti‐
mated  as follows, to ensure that simulations were properly cali‐
brated to their intended values. Note that to vary R0 , the  pro‐
portionality constant in the function that maps viral load to in‐
fectiousness need only be adjusted up or down. In a typical  SEIR
model,  this  would correspond to changing the infectiousness pa‐
rameter which governs the rate at which I‐to‐S contacts cause new
infections .  For the fully‐mixed, the value of R0 was numerical‐
ly estimated by running single‐generation simulations in which  a
50  infected  individual were placed in a population of N 50 oth‐
ers. The number of secondary infections from those initially  in‐
fected  was  recorded and used to directly estimate R0 .  For the
agent‐based model, the value of R0 depends on the distribution of
infected  agents  due  to stratification by age and household. We
numerically estimate R0 by averaging over the number of secondary
infections  caused by each agent who was infected in the first 15
days of the simulation (at which point the  population  is  still
more than 99.99% susceptible).  Estimations of R proceeded exact‐
ly as estimations of R0 for both models,  except  with  interven‐
tions  applied to the the viral loads and therefore the dynamics.
Supplemental Text Adjustments for false negatives  and  test  re‐
fusal  When  an  infected individual is not diagnosed, due either
refusal to participate in testing or due to a false negative  re‐
sult  unrelated  to  limit of detectionfor instance due to an im‐
properly collected samplethe impact on a  surveillance  strategys
effectiveness  can  be  estimated as follows.  Let se be the test
sensitivity, in the particular sense of the probability  of  cor‐
rectly diagnosing an individual as positive when that persons vi‐
ral load should, in principle, have provided a  sufficiently  Let
f0  be  the  total infectiousness removed with no testing policy,
i.e. due to symptom‐driven self isolation. Let ftest be the frac‐
tion  of total infectiousness removed with a chosen testing poli‐
cy, inclusive of symptom‐driven self isolation, assuming that  se
=  1 and r = 0. Note that f0 and ftest are the heights of bars in
Figs. 1C and 3C, with f0 corresponding to the no test height  and
ftest  corresponding  to  a  testing program. Under these assump‐
tions, when se = 1 and r = 0, Both f0 and ftest can be  estimated
rapidly  via  Monte  Carlo  to make this approximation by drawing
trajectories and applying a surveillance policy to  them1  .   In
this  context,  adjusting for false negatives and test refusal is
straightforward. When se < 1 and/or when r > 0,  this  approxima‐
tion  can  be  modified.  The probability that an individual is a
non‐refuser and the test does not fail is se(1r). Under  the  as‐
sumption  of statistical independence between refusal status, vi‐
ral load, and se, the approximation becomes + 1  se(1  r) R0 ,  R
se(1  r) which simply expresses a weighted combination of removed
infectiousness between a successfully executed test and no  test.
Intuitively,  note  that if one plugs in r = 1 (complete refusal)
or completely failing sensitivity se = 0, then R  R0 , as expect‐
ed.  includes this estimate.











































