WJ  C  C  Clinical  Cases World J Clin Cases 2020 June 26; 8(12):
2655‐2661 CASE REPORT Low‐grade fever during  COVID‐19  convales‐
cence:  A  report  of 3 Shu‐Fan Zhuang, Jia Hu, Nan Qiao, Zhi‐Hui
Lan,    Jun‐Yu    Lai,    Jian‐Guang     Wu,     Xiao‐Yong     Wu
(0000‐0002‐2613‐896X);  Jia  Hu  (0000‐0002‐4459‐3106);  Nan Qiao
(0000‐0001‐8202‐1945); Zhi‐Hui Lan (0000‐0003‐0629‐0267);  Jun‐Yu
Lai  Wu (0000‐0002‐4005‐6776); XiaoYong Wu (0000‐0002‐2229‐5183).
J, Lan ZH, and Lai JY treated these patients and participated  in
collecting data; Wu JG guided treatment; Wu XY performed the read
and approved the final Shu‐Fan Zhuang, Jia Hu, Department of Gas‐
troenterology,   The  Affiliated  Hospital  of  Jiangxi  Nanchang
330088, Jiangxi Province,  China  Traditional  Chinese  Medicine,
Nanchang  330006,  Jiangxi Province, China Jun‐Yu Lai, Jian‐Guang
Wu, Department of Cardiology, The Affiliated Hospital of  Jiangxi
Traditional  Chinese Medicine, Nanchang 330006, Jiangxi Province,
China  Medicine,  445  Bayi  Avenue,  Donghu  District,  Nanchang
330006,  Jiangxi Province, China.  Supported by Emergency Special
Project on Prevention and Treatment of COVID‐19 with  Traditional
Chinese Medicine, No.  Informed consent statement: Informed writ‐
ten consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this
report  and any accompanying images.  Conflict‐of‐interest state‐
ment: The conflict of interest.  CARE Checklist (2016) statement:
Checklist (2016), and the revised according to the CARE Low‐grade
fever during convalescence is an atypical symptom of  coronavirus
disease  2019 (COVID‐19). Reports of such cases are rare, and the
mechanism and outcome of low‐grade fever during  COVID‐19  conva‐
lescence  are  not  completely clear. We report 3 cases with low‐
grade fever during COVID‐19 convalescence and highlight the  main
clinical,  radiographic,  and laboratory characteristics, thereby
increasing the level of expertise in the clinical  management  of
COVID‐19 during convalescence and facilitating individualized de‐
cision‐making.   CASE  SUMMARY  We  describe  3   patients   with
COVID‐19,  two  females aged 62 and 66 years and a male 55 years,
who had low‐grade fever during COVID‐19 convalescence. All 3  pa‐
tients  had no other discomfort or comorbidities during low‐grade
process.  Lesions on computed tomography in all  3  patients  had
resolved  during this period. Two patients tested negative on two
consecutive severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 tests
with an interval of at least 24 h between tests. Body temperature
in all 3 patients returned to normal after several  days  without
treatment,  and fever recurrence was not observed.  Enhancing the
knowledge of low‐grade fever during COVID‐19 convalescence Zhuang
SF  et al. Low‐grade fever during COVID‐19 convalescence distrib‐
ute, remix, adapt, build on different terms, provided the  origi‐
nal work is properly cited and First decision: April 24, 2020 Re‐
vised: May 5, 2020 may increase the expertise in the delivery  of
optimal healthcare services.  Key words: COVID‐19; Convalescence;
Low‐grade fever; Clinical characteristics; SARSCoV‐2; Case report
Core  tip: Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‐19) has spread rapidly
worldwide, and our knowledge of this infection is still  insuffi‐
cient  in  many respects. We present 3 cases with low‐grade fever
during COVID‐19 convalescence. These  cases  highlight  the  main
clinical,   radiographic,   and   laboratory  characteristics  of
COVID‐19 and help provide guidance for frontline medical staff in
terms  of  clinical management and individualized decision‐making
during convalescence.  Citation: Zhuang SF, Hu J, Qiao N, Lan ZH,
Lai  JY,  Wu JG, Wu XY. Low‐grade fever during COVID‐19 convales‐
cence: A report of 3 cases.  World  J  Clin  Cases  2020;  8(12):
2655‐2661  Since  the outbreak in December 2019, coronavirus dis‐
ease 2019 (COVID‐19) has spread worldwide[1]. The number  of  in‐
fected  cases  and  the  death toll have markedly increased [2] .
Studies have confirmed that COVID‐19 is caused  by  severe  acute
respiratory  syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS‐CoV‐2) via human to hu‐
man transmission[3]. Although there have been reports on the epi‐
demiological  and  clinical characteristics of COVID‐19[1,4], our
knowledge on this infection is still  insufficient  in  many  re‐
spects,  such as symptoms, trends, prognosis, etc. In particular,
if disease fluctuations or recurrence  develop  during  convales‐
cence,  which  refers  to  recovered non‐febrile patients without
respiratory symptoms[5], a patient’s treatment may fail  and  the
patient  may spread the virus to others. Thus, we report 3 clini‐
cal cases of lowgrade fever (axillary temperature of 37‐38C) dur‐
ing  COVID‐19 convalescence, and highlight the main clinical, ra‐
diographic, and laboratory characteristics. We hope that this re‐
port will enhance the knowledge of COVID‐19 and help increase the
level of expertise in frontline  medical  staff  with  regard  to
clinical  management  and  individualized  decision‐making during
convalescence.  CASE PRESENTATION Chief complaints Patient A  was
a  62‐year‐old  female who had a fever, cough, and anorexia for 1
wk, Patient B was a 66‐year‐old female with a fever and cough for
2  d,  and  Patient C was a 55‐year‐old male with a fever, cough,
and fatigue for 4 d.  History of present illness Patient A:  From
disease  onset on 1 February 2020, the patient had a fever with a
maximum axillary temperature of 39.8C, which was accompanied by a
cough  and upper respiratory tract infection and was treated with
antibiotics and ribavirin.   Isolation  and  preventive  measures
were  not  taken.  The  patient’s  condition did not improve, and
COVID‐19 was confirmed  on  February  7  by  positive  SARS‐CoV‐2
oropharyngeal  swab  test at our local Center for Disease Control
(CDC). She was transferred to an isolation  ward,  and  antiviral
treatment with arbidol was administered. Her temperature returned
to normal on February 10, but new lesions and arbidol  were  dis‐
continued  on  February  18 and February 20, respectively, and no
drugs were used since then. During convalescence,  the  patient’s
cough  and anorexia were completely relieved, and two consecutive
SARS‐CoV‐2 tests were negative with an interval of at least 24  h
between  tests.  However,  she  developed low‐grade fever for 3 d
from February 23 to 25 without any other discomfort or comorbidi‐
ties, and her CT Zhuang SF et al. Low‐grade fever during COVID‐19
convalescence Patient B: From disease onset on 4  February  2020,
the  patient  had  a fever with a maximum axillary temperature of
38.1C, accompanied by a cough (details shown in common upper res‐
piratory tract infection and was treated with the Lianhua Qingwen
not improve, and COVID‐19 was confirmed on February 5 by positive
SARS‐CoV‐2  oropharyngeal  swab  test  at  our local CDC. She was
transferred to an isolation ward 17, and no drugs were used since
then. During convalescence, the patient’s cough was remained pos‐
itive. She developed low‐grade fever for 4 d from February 23  to
26  temperature returned to normal without treatment.  Patient C:
From disease onset on 31 January 2020, the patient  had  a  fever
with  a maximum axillary temperature of 39.9C, which was accompa‐
nied by a cough and respiratory tract infection and  was  treated
with antibiotics. Isolation and preventive measures were not tak‐
en, and the patient’s condition did  not  improve.  COVID‐19  was
confirmed on February 3 by positive SARS‐CoV‐2 oropharyngeal swab
test at our local CDC. He was transferred to  an  isolation  ward
and  treated with arbidol, interferon, glucocorticoid, and expec‐
torants. His temperature returned to normal on drugs were discon‐
tinued  on February 13. During convalescence, the patient’s cough
and fatigue were completely relieved, and two  consecutive  SARS‐
CoV‐2  tests  were negative with an interval of at least 24 h be‐
tween tests. However, he developed lowgrade fever for  3  d  from
February  24 to 26 without any other discomfort or normal without
treatment.  Personal and family history  Patient  A  had  contact
with  a  COVID‐19‐confirmed patient (not confirmed at that time).
Patient B had no contact history in the affected regions or  with
infected persons.  Patient C had contact with persons from Wuhan,
China, where the epidemic was first Physical examination upon ad‐
mission  In all 3 patients, Velcro rales were heard in both lungs
at the onset and disappeared  during  convalescence.   Laboratory
examinations  Blood  cell analysis and SARS‐CoV‐2 test results in
the 3 patients at different time function,  electrolytes,  lipid,
and  glucose), tumor biomarkers, and coagulation function Imaging
examinations Patient A: On February 5 (onset stage), ground‐glass
opacities  (GGO)  were seen in the posterior right lower lung. On
February 13 (temperature returned to normal), the lesion was sig‐
nificantly enlarged with solid shadows and blurred edges. On Feb‐
ruary 24 (low‐grade fever stage during  convalescence),  the  le‐
sions  had  been absorbed and the density was decreased.  Patient
B: On February 6 (onset stage),  there  were  multiple  irregular
schistose  GGO  in both lungs (mainly under the pleura) with con‐
solidations and strip shadows. On February  16  (temperature  re‐
turned  to normal) the lesions were partially absorbed, the range
reduced, and the density decreased.  On  February  24  (low‐grade
fever  stage  during convalescence), the lesions were further ab‐
sorbed and were less dense.  Patient  C:  On  February  3  (onset
stage), small patchy GGO appeared in the right lung.  On February
10 (temperature returned to normal), the lesions  were  increased
and  enlarged,  showing  multiple irregular schistose GGO in both
lungs (mainly under the pleura) and some  strip  shadows  in  the
posterior  left  lower lung. On February 25 (lowgrade fever stage
during convalescence), the lesions  were  absorbed  and  reduced,
with  partial  strip  changes.   Zhuang SF et al. Low‐grade fever
during COVID‐19 convalescence Patient A Patient B Patient  C  Age
in  yr  Hb: 110‐160 g/L PCT: 0.5‐1.5 ng/mL CRP:  10 mg/L SAA:  10
mg/L SARS‐CoV‐2 test ++: Severe; +: Mild or moderate. CRP:  C‐re‐
active  protein;  Hb: Hemoglobin; NA: Not available; N: Negative;
NEUT:  Neutrophils;  P:  Positive;   PCT:   Procalcitonin;   PLT:
Platelet;  SAA:  Serum amyloid A; RBC: Red blood cell; WBC: White
blood cell.  FINAL DIAGNOSIS The 3 patients were  confirmed  with
COVID‐19  by positive SARS‐CoV‐2 Zhuang SF et al. Low‐grade fever
during COVID‐19 convalescence returned to normal. Lesions had re‐
solved  in  all 3 patients when low‐grade fever occurred. Red ar‐
rows indicate new lesions.  oropharyngeal swab test at our  local
CDC.   All 3 patients did not receive any treatment for low‐grade
fever, and body temperature  returned  to  normal  after  several
days.   OUTCOME AND FOLLOW‐UP The 3 patients had no recurrence of
low‐grade fever, any other discomfort, or comorbidities. Patients
A  and  C  had no recurrence of positive SARS‐CoV‐2 tests.  SARS‐
CoV‐2 tests in Patient B were negative on March  4  and  did  not
change to Self‐limiting low‐grade fever during COVID‐19 convales‐
cence is an atypical symptom of infectious diseases. The  charac‐
teristics  of  the  3 presented cases are summarized as All 3 pa‐
tients experienced leukopenia and  neutropenia  during  low‐grade
fever.   Leukopenia  and  neutropenia  often indicate low immuni‐
ty[6,7] and are more common in COVID‐19  patients  than  in  non‐
COVID‐19 patients[8]. The trend in white blood cells in Zhuang SF
et al. Low‐grade fever during COVID‐19 convalescence  the  3  pa‐
tients  shifted  with  disease onset, normothermia, and low‐grade
fever. That is, leukopenia occurred during the  course  of  fever
but  returned  to  normal when the patients were normothermic. We
speculate that these patients with COVID‐19 had  low‐grade  fever
during  convalescence because their immunity was not fully recov‐
ered at this stage. This suggests that disease  fluctuations  and
recurrence  of positive SARS‐CoV‐2 may occur in convalescence [9]
, thus surveillance cannot be relaxed at this stage.  The CT fea‐
tures in the 3 patients were consistent with typical COVID‐19 and
include involvement of both lung parenchyma and interstitium; the
GGO  and a single lesion appearing in early‐phase of disease; co‐
existence of aggravation and repair of CT signs in  the  advanced
phase; and presentation of multifocal distributions in the middle
and lower lung areas and the  posterior  lung  region[10].  Other
studies have reported that during recovery from COVID‐19 (without
severe respiratory distress), severe lung abnormalities are  seen
approximately 10 d after initial onset of symptoms[11]. This sug‐
gests that changes in CT lesions are not directly related to body
temperature,  and  these  two  sets of data could complement each
other in risk assessment of COVID‐19.  During the course of  low‐
grade fever, the 3 patients had no other discomfort or comorbidi‐
ties, and their temperature returned to normal without any treat‐
ment.  We  speculate  that low‐grade fever may be driven by SARS‐
CoV‐2 evolution with genetic diversity. Phan[3]  found  mutations
and  deletions  on  coding  and non‐coding regions in complete or
near‐complete genomes of SARS‐CoV‐2. Therefore, the emergence  of
deficient  genomes during mutation and recombination of the virus
is not surprising [12] , and this is similar to  cell  wall‐defi‐
cient  bacteria  [13] . Non‐dominant deficient genomes can easily
escape immune attacks while dominant genomes  are  with  complete
viral  replication  [14] and stimulating the host’s antiviral im‐
mune It is noteworthy that two of the 3 patients had  consecutive
negative  SARS‐CoV‐2  tests with an interval of at least 24 h be‐
tween tests but another patient remained positive when  low‐grade
fever occurred. To date, no research has accurately confirmed the
contagious period of COVID‐19. The return  of  a  positive  SARS‐
CoV‐2  RNA test during convalescence has been reported[9]. In ad‐
dition to the basic immunity of the host  and  the  high‐mutation
biological  characteristics of SARS‐CoV‐2, detection could be af‐
fected by the site at which specimens are obtained, operators ex‐
perience,  and  the  actual  viral load[9,16]. Furthermore, SARS‐
CoV‐2 infection mainly focuses on the lungs rather than the upper
respiratory tract[17], and some studies have indicated that high‐
er viral loads have  been  detected  in  the  nose  than  in  the
throat[9];  thus, sampling during the recovery stage using throat
a swab or sputum may not detect  the  Given  the  possibility  of
turning positive again for SARS‐CoV‐2 and to provide warnings for
other COVID‐19 cases, we suggest that:  (1)  Multiple  biological
sample tests should be considered, including oropharyngeal swabs,
nasopharyngeal  swabs,  sputum,  bronchoalveolar  lavage   fluid,
blood,  stool,  and urine, especially for highly suspected false‐
negative SARS‐CoV‐2 candidates; (2)  The  number  of  consecutive
negative  SARS‐CoV‐2  tests with an interval of at least 24 h be‐
tween tests should be increased to 3 before  discharge;  (3)  All
discharged patients should extend home quarantine for at least 21
d; and (4) Patients who have not turned  negative  for  SARSCoV‐2
more than 1.5 mo should be closely monitored and even during con‐
valescence should also be regularly tested for  risk  assessment.
Low‐grade  fever  during  convalescence is an atypical symptom of
COVID‐19. These cases are not rare, but the mechanism and outcome
of  low‐grade  fever  during  convalescence is not yet completely
clear. Enhancing the knowledge on low‐grade fever during COVID‐19
convalescence  might facilitate refined risk surveillance, preci‐
sion risk assessment, and dynamic risk  management,  thereby  in‐
creasing  the level of expertise for tailored delivery of optimal
healthcare services for each patient with Zhuang SF et  al.  Low‐
grade  fever during COVID‐19 convalescence Ling Y, Xu SB, Lin YX,
Tian D, Zhu ZQ, Dai FH, Wu F, Song ZG, Huang W, Chen  J,  Hu  BJ,
Wang S, Mao EQ, Zhu L, Zhang WH, Lu HZ. Persistence and clearance
of viral RNA in 2019 novel coronavirus  Hastreiter  AA,  Makiyama
EN,  Borelli P, Fock RA. Impairment of G‐CSF receptor on granulo‐
cytic Wen J, Yang T, Wang J, Ma X, Tong Y, Zhao Y. Kanglaite  In‐
jection  Combined with Chemotherapy versus Chemotherapy Alone for
the Improvement of Clinical Efficacy and Immune Function  in  Pa‐
tients Li YX, Wu W, Yang T, Zhou W, Fu YM, Feng QM, Ye JM. [Char‐
acteristics of peripheral blood leukocyte Chen D, Xu  W,  Lei  Z,
Huang  Z, Liu J, Gao Z, Peng L. Recurrence of positive SARS‐CoV‐2
RNA in Zhou S, Wang Y, Zhu T, Xia L. CT Features  of  Coronavirus
Disease  2019  (COVID‐19) Pneumonia in 62 Pan F, Ye T, Sun P, Gui
S, Liang B, Li L, Zheng D, Wang J, Hesketh RL, Yang L,  Zheng  C.
Time  Course  of  Lung  Changes  at Chest CT during Recovery from
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID‐19). Radiology Ismail  SNFB,  Ba‐
harum  SN, Fazry S, Low CF. Comparative genome analysis reveals a
distinct  influence  of  nucleotide  composition  on   virus‐host
species‐specific interaction of prawn‐infecting nodavirus. J Fish
Xu Y, Zhang B, Wang L, Jing T, Chen J, Xu X, Zhang  W,  Zhang  Y,
Han J. Unusual features and Saira K, Lin X, DePasse JV, Halpin R,
Twaddle A, Stockwell T, Angus B, Cozzi‐Lepri A, Delfino M,  Dugan
V, Dwyer DE, Freiberg M, Horban A, Losso M, Lynfield R, Wentworth
DN, Holmes EC, Davey R, Wentworth DE, Ghedin  E;  INSIGHT  FLU002
Study  Group; INSIGHT FLU003 Study Group. Sequence analysis of in
vivo defective interfering‐like RNA of influenza A H1N1  pandemic
virus.  J  Virol  2013;  87:  Boergeling  Y,  Rozhdestvensky  TS,
Schmolke M, Resa‐Infante P, Robeck T, Randau G, Wolff T,  Gabriel
G,  Brosius  J,  Ludwig  S. Evidence for a Novel Mechanism of In‐
fluenza Virus‐Induced Type I Interferon Li Z, Yi Y, Luo X,  Xiong
N,  Liu  Y,  Li  S, Sun R, Wang Y, Hu B, Chen W, Zhang Y, Wang J,
Huang B, Lin Y, Yang J, Cai W, Wang X, Cheng J, Chen  Z,  Sun  K,
Pan W, Zhan Z, Chen L, Ye F. Development and clinical application
of a rapid IgM‐IgG combined antibody test for  SARS‐CoV‐2  infec‐
tion  diagnosis.  J  Huang  C, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, Zhao J, Hu Y,
Zhang L, Fan G, Xu J, Gu X, Cheng Z, Yu T, Xia J, Wei  Y,  Wu  W,
Xie  X,  Yin W, Li H, Liu M, Xiao Y, Gao H, Guo L, Xie J, Wang G,
Jiang R, Gao Z, Jin Q, Wang J, Cao B. Clinical  features  of  pa‐
tients  infected  with  2019  novel  coronavirus in Wuhan, China.
7041 Koll Center Parkway, Suite 160, Pleasanton, CA 94566, USA














































