Children’s (in)visibility in social vulnerability and the
impact of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19)
A (in)visibilidade da criança em vulnerabilidade social e o impacto do novo coronavírus (COVID19)
La (in)visibilidad del niño en la vulnerabilidad social y el impacto del nuevo coronavirus (COVID19)
Marialda Moreira ChristoffelI
Ana Leticia Monteiro GomesII
Tania Vignuda de SouzaII
Lia Leão CiuffoII
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro.
Macaé, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro.
Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Christoffel MM, Gomes ALM, Souza TV, Ciuffo LL.
Children’s (in)visibility in social vulnerability and
the impact of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19).
Ana Leticia Monteiro Gomes
EDITOR IN CHIEF: Dulce Barbosa
ASSOCIATE EDITOR: Antonio José de Almeida Filho
Objective: To examine the impact of the infection by the novel coronavirus on Brazilian
children in situation of social vulnerability based on the Millennium Sustainable Development
Goals. Method: Reflective study based on discursive formulation in three aspects: principles of
the objectives and goals for the millennium sustainable development; impact of the pandemic
on the health of children and their families living in social vulnerability; and the role of pediatric
nursing in the care provided - limits and challenges. Results: In January 2020, the news of
COVID 19 is released as a pandemic. In Brazil, children and families are still without access to
basic rights, thereby increasing their risks of social vulnerability because of the quarantine. The
nursing field has an important role in monitoring children and their families, offering guidance
in search for solutions and preventing contamination. Conclusion: There are still challenges to
be overcome by the children and their families in situations of vulnerability against COVID-19.
Descriptors: Coronavirus Infections; Children; Vulnerable Population; Sustainable Development;
Pediatric Nursing.
Objetivo: Refletir sobre o impacto da infecção pelo novo coronavírus nas crianças brasileiras
em situação de vulnerabilidade social, com base nos Objetivos de Desenvolvimento
Sustentável do Milênio. Método: Estudo reflexivo fundamentado na formulação discursiva
em três momentos: princípios dos objetivos e das metas de desenvolvimento sustentável do
milênio; impacto da pandemia na saúde das crianças e famílias em vulnerabilidade social; e o
papel da enfermagem pediátrica nos cuidados prestados – limites e desafios. Resultados: Em
janeiro de 2020, a COVID19 é divulgada como pandemia. No Brasil, crianças e famílias ainda
se encontram sem acesso a direitos básicos, aumentando os riscos de vulnerabilidade social
pela quarentena. A enfermagem tem papel relevante no acompanhamento das crianças e
suas famílias, oferecendo orientações na busca de soluções e na prevenção da contaminação.
Conclusão: Ainda existem desafios a serem superados pelas crianças e suas famílias em
situação de vulnerabilidade diante da COVID-19.
Descritores: Infecções por Coronavírus; Criança; Vulnerabilidade Social; Desenvolvimento
Sustentável; Enfermagem Pediátrica.
Objetivo: Reflexionar sobre el impacto de la infección por el nuevo coronavirus en los niños
brasileños en situación de vulnerabilidad social, con base en los Objetivos de Desarrollo
discursiva en tres momentos: principios de los objetivos y de las metas de desarrollo
vulnerabilidad social; y el papel de la enfermería pediátrica en los cuidados prestados – límites
y desafíos. Resultados: En enero de 2020, el COVID-19 ha sido divulgado como pandemia.
En Brasil, niños y familias aún se encuentran sin acceso a derechos básicos, aumentando los
riesgos de vulnerabilidad social por la cuarentena. La enfermería tiene papel relevante en
el acompañamiento de los niños y sus familias, ofreciendo orientaciones en la búsqueda
de soluciones y en la prevención de la contaminación. Conclusión: Aún hay desafíos a ser
superados por los niños y sus familias en situación de vulnerabilidad delante del COVID-19.
Enfermería Pediátrica.
Children’s (in)visibility in social vulnerability and the impact of the novel coronavirus (COVID 19)
Christoffel MM, Gomes ALM, Souza TV, Ciuffo LL.
In early December 2019, several cases of pneumonia of unknown
origin emerged in Wuhan, Hubei province, China. Most patients
diagnosed with this pneumonia reported exposure to the Wholesale Seafood Market, which sells many species of live animals(1).
On January 3, 2020, a new member of the coronavirus family
was identified in samples of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from
a patient in Wuhan. The novel virus has been confirmed by the
Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention as the cause
of the disease under investigation and has spread rapidly across
China and other continents(1).
On January 7, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) named
the newly discovered etiologic agent as the novel coronavirus,
which causes Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, also known
as SARS-CoV-2 or COVID-19 (so named on February 11, 2020)(1).
On January 11, WHO declared the issue as a public health
emergency of international concern, since the virus was spreading worldwide, and it was characterized as a pandemic. By that
time several countries had already confirmed cases of COVID-19,
including the United States of America, Germany and Japan(1).
COVID-19 affects all age groups, varying from mild symptoms
to severe respiratory conditions, especially severe pneumonia.
Symptoms include fever, cough, nasal congestion, runny nose,
sore throat, but there may also be an increase in respiratory
rate, wheezing and pneumonia up to severe acute respiratory
syndrome, or, in some cases, respiratory failure. Gastrointestinal
symptoms such as vomiting and diarrhea can also happen, but
are more common in children than in adults(1-2).
As far as the children’s age is concerned, the data show that, so
far, infection with SARS-CoV-2 rarely affects children; and when
children manifest symptoms of the disease, they are most often
mild. Thus, in most cases, children are asymptomatic carriers of
the virus. However, their potential to transmit the virus has not
been ruled out even if they do not show clinical manifestations(1-2).
A type of medical research conducted in China, known as clinical
series, tracked 2,143 pediatric patients with COVID-19 reported
to the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, from
January 16 to February 8, 2020. The results revealed 731 (34.1%)
laboratory confirmed cases and 1,412 (65.9%) suspected cases.
The average age of all cases in children was 7 years (interquartile
range: 2-13), and 1,213 cases (56.6%) were boys. Over 90% of all
cases in children were asymptomatic, mild, or moderate. The median time from disease onset to diagnosis was 2 days (interval: 0
to 42 days). They reached a conclusion that, although the clinical
manifestations of COVID-19 cases in children were generally less
severe than in adult patients, young children, especially babies,
were vulnerable to the infection(1).
Recent results from another Chinese study show that of
the total reported cases of the disease, only 0.9% occurred in
children, totaling 416 cases in the range of 0 to 9 years, none of
which evolved to death; in relation to adolescents from 10 to 19
years of age, 549 cases (1.2%) were totaled, with 1 death (0.1%)
of a 13-year-old adolescent. The lethality rate is 0.2% in patients
between 10 and 19 years of age(3).
Based on limited, however, current evidence, on March 30, 2020,
the American Academy of Pediatrics and the Brazilian Society
of Pediatrics, and following suit, on April 6, 2020, the Brazilian
Association of Midwives and Obstetric Nurses and the Brazilian
Society of Pediatric Nurses, provided temporary guidance for
clinical management of newborns of mothers with suspected or
confirmed diagnosis of COVID-19, as well as clinical management
of children with the virus. It was also informed that, until then,
vertical transmission had not been proven(2).
In Brazil, until 04:00 PM on April 6, 2020, 12,056 cases were
confirmed, 553 deaths and a lethality rate of 4.6%, but there
was no age stratification from those infected. It is known that
58% (n = 7,046) of confirmed cases are located in the Southeast
region. The state of Rio de Janeiro holds 1,461 of the total cases, 8
of them are children 0 to 10 years old. The data reveal 71 deaths,
showing a lethality rate of 4.9%, but with no deaths registered in
the age group from 0 to 10 years old until then(4).
In facing this pandemic, it is necessary to reflect on the sustainable development of the millennium in times of COVID-19,
as many are the challenges to combat the pandemic in children
and families in situations of social vulnerability.
Reflect on the impact of the infection by the novel coronavirus
on Brazilian children in situations of social vulnerability considering the Millennium Sustainable Development Goals.
It is a reflective study based on discursive formulation in three
aspects: the principles of the objectives and goals of sustainable
development of the millennium; the impact of the pandemic on
the health of children and families in social vulnerability; and the
role of pediatric nursing in the care provided - limits and challenges.
The principles of the Millennium Sustainable Development Goals and the challenges before and after COVID-19
The Agenda 2030 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
comprise 17 objectives and 169 goals and can be defined as a
model to provide the integration between economy, society and
the environment, that is, it is the notion that economic growth
must take into account not only social inclusion, but also environmental protection(5).
These goals involve fields or topics relevant to improving
child health, such as poverty eradication, food security and
agriculture, good health, education, gender equality, reducing
inequality, energy, clean water and sanitation, sustainable patterns of production and consumption, climate action, sustainable
cities, protection and sustainable usage of resources from oceans
and terrestrial ecosystems, comprehensive economic growth,
infrastructure and industrialization, organization and means for
implementing those policies(5).
In this sense, the area of maternal, neonatal and child health
stands out as a great challenge, since many women and children
live in vulnerable conditions and must be made aware of their
rights. To this end, it is necessary to undertake efforts to strengthen
public policies to assist these groups.
Children’s (in)visibility in social vulnerability and the impact of the novel coronavirus (COVID 19)
Christoffel MM, Gomes ALM, Souza TV, Ciuffo LL.
Whereas the needs experienced by certain populations and
people in social vulnerability place them in a situation where
greater social and health needs arise, the lack of access to quality
health services, treatments and technologies has a negative effect
on the health and life/death of these social groups(6), especially
with regard to the children’s public, since children exposed to
adverse health conditions, if they survive, may present problems
in their growth and development.
According to UNICEF (2020), some millennium sustainable
development goals are directly connected to the topics without girls and boys cannot survive, thrive and develop their full
against poverty(5).
From the health perspective, the social determinants, the
need to strengthen health systems and the social safety net affect the health of children and families in vulnerable situations,
such as people living in informal settlements, homeless people,
populations in rural areas, children, people with disabilities,
immigrants, refugees, people at risk from disaster and all other
vulnerable groups.
In 2000, Brazil was considered a country of high social vulnerability, but had this index reduced, in 2010, to the middle
social vulnerability range. The social vulnerability index (SoVI) is
calculated based on three dimensions: income and work; human
capital; and urban infrastructure(7).
It is known that Brazilian macro-regional inequalities are still
maintained, in which the North and Northeast present predominantly higher SoVI, while the cities of the Center-South of the
country present better results, with a decrease of this index(7).
Regarding the Brazilian human infrastructure dimension,
there are still populations living in urban households without
garbage collection service and with inadequate water supply
and sanitation(7).
In relation to human capital, we still have children who do not
do not learn even the basic skills. The goal on education addresses
access to learning opportunities and the quality of teaching.
The SDGs on poverty, inequality and gender discrimination
highlight that children and their families are not receiving fair
opportunities, therefore there is a need for actions to strengthen
social protection systems(5).
Consequently, the objectives and SDGs to be achieved are
complex and require an investment in time to create public policies that will address so many issues concerning citizen’s rights,
especially children’s rights.
It is noted that issues related to the situation of social vulnerability still present today in Brazil and in other countries, were
already in place before the COVID-19 pandemic. Therefore, it
is necessary to reflect on the impact of this infection on the
achievement of the objectives and SDGs proposed for the year
2030, with a view to reducing this vulnerability.
Impact of the pandemic on the health of children and
families in social vulnerability
Social vulnerability can be perceived as the resilience of communities when confronted by external health stressors such as
natural or human-made disasters or disease epidemics. Reducing social vulnerability can reduce both human suffering and
economic losses(8).
Based on the above-mentioned concept, the elements considered of vulnerability in the child’s development and social
inequities according to the nurse’s point of view who is integrated in the Family Health Strategy are: low parental education;
unemployment; low income; lack of basic sanitation; precarious
housing situation; no access to professionalization, social programs and vacancies in daycare centers. It is important to note
that vulnerability in children’s development is also related to
socioeconomic elements and that their understanding extends
beyond the biological and individual components of children’s
In developing countries, one of the most important aspects
that must be highlighted is the contradictions between what is
a citizen’s right and the scope of the less favored population to
these rights, especially regarding basic issues such as housing,
So, at this time of the pandemic of the novel coronavirus,
according to the recommendation of the Ministry of Health, in
compliance with the National Contingency Plan for Human Infection by the novel Coronavirus, there must be a social isolation,
whose main measures are: strict hand hygiene and respiratory
etiquette, as well as to avoid crowding, to adopt social distancing
measures, such as maintaining a 4.92 feet distance apart from
another person when outdoors, but mainly to stay indoors, except
for those who work in essential activities, such as supermarkets,
pharmacies, health units and others.
However, in order to meet these measures, it is necessary to
reflect on which part of the Brazilian population lives in communities that do not have adequate infrastructure and basic sanitation,
thus presenting difficulties in relation to personal hygiene and the
environment. Many families live in narrow rooms, in conditions that
do not favor isolation in case someone becomes contaminated
with the coronavirus. The main source of family income is often
obtained from informal and face-to-face activities, making it impossible to do their work remotely, among many other problems.
Therefore, the pandemic of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19)
may change the reality experienced by children for worse, in view
disrupt children’s routine and social support, adding new stress
on parents and custodians, who must find new options to care
for the children at home, such as offering activities and food that
The marginalization and discrimination related to COVID-19
can make children more exposed to violence and psychological
distress, that is, children and families who are already vulnerable due to socio-economic exclusion or those who living in
overcrowded places are particularly at risk(10).
Role of the pediatric nurse providing health care - limits and
challenges in times of pandemic of the novel coronavirus
It is clear that nursing practice should be aligned with other
professionals and sectors of the health area, in order to seek the
convergence of actions aimed at patients, in a joint effort that allows
Children’s (in)visibility in social vulnerability and the impact of the novel coronavirus (COVID 19)
Christoffel MM, Gomes ALM, Souza TV, Ciuffo LL.
the exchange of knowledge and enhances the offer of more effective and resolutive care with a view to full attention to the patient.
Nursing practices should also be attuned to the demands and
needs of their territories. Among these demands are both those
related to the care of children and their families in situations of
social vulnerability during the pandemic, and those related to
the Federal Constitution(6).
In this line, it is essential that nursing works its technical and
scientific knowledge with the children’s families in order to promote actions that transform reality in order to empower them,
of the entire population.
Among the transformative actions mentioned above, we
highlight those related to the education of children and families
about the pandemic prevention measures, such as frequent hand
washing with soap and water, the correct and rational use of
supplies such as hand sanitizer with 70% gel alcohol and masks
for personal protection. In addition, the nursing staff should also
advise on cleaning and disinfecting household environments
using cloths moistened with disinfectant products in the correct
concentration - for example, sodium hypochlorite.
Such personal hygiene and environmental measures are the
basis of Florence Nightingale’s environmentalist theory, which,
to this day, is one of the main foundations of our profession. It
is necessary to explain that to the general population and especially to the children, since they are often the ones who learn
and spread the knowledge wherever they go.
The nursing staff and the pediatric nurse also play an important
role in assisting during a possible hospitalization of the child.
However, in order for assistance to occur in the manner recommended, it is necessary to discuss issues related to the lack of
provision of individual protection resources and technologies,
for nursing to provide risk-free assistance to itself.
The challenges for the practice of nursing go beyond the
acquisition of resources and technology, and it is necessary to
invest in this professional in order to have knowledge about
inequalities, it is necessary to create intersectoral instances, beyond the scope of the health field, that converge their resources
in the formulation of public policies that provide the guarantee
of the full enjoyment of social rights by all people of our society
and of the planetary community(6).
Study limitations
The central idea of the study is not to exhaust concepts,
theories, methods and possibilities concerning the impact of
the infection by the novel coronavirus in Brazilian children, but
to provoke reflections to achieve the Millennium Sustainable
Development Goals and also to point out guidelines that may
sustain the debates between educational and health institutions.
Contributions to the field
processes and to health institutions, since it brings updated
evidence. In this perspective, it is thought that the considerations
now exposed are valuable to the nursing action before the child
and the family in a situation of social vulnerability. This being
said, the contribution of this study is found in the possibilities
of health actions that encompass the inclusion of vulnerable
populations in the Brazilian context, aiming at the improvement
of care and services in health.
It is concluded that, in line with the sustainable millennium
goals, there are still challenges to be overcome for children and
hygiene and responding to the decrease in family income through
quarantine. In this sense, pediatric nursing has an important role
in promoting prevention measures, as well as in detecting and
evaluating suspected cases of COVID-19. In addition, nursing
professionals should advocate for ensuring the full enjoyment
of social rights, especially for the children and their families.
Dong Y, Mo X, Hu Y, Qi X, Jiang F, Jiang Z, et al. Epidemiological characteristics of 2143 pediatric patients with 2019 coronavirus disease in
Sociedade Brasileira de Pediatria (BR). Departamento científico de infectologia. Orientações a Respeito da Infecção pelo SARS-CoV-2
The Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia Emergency Response Epidemiology Team. CDC-China (CH). The Epidemiological Characteristics of an
Children’s (in)visibility in social vulnerability and the impact of the novel coronavirus (COVID 19)
Christoffel MM, Gomes ALM, Souza TV, Ciuffo LL.
Aliança para a Proteção da Criança em Ações Humanitárias. Nota Técnica: Proteção da Criança durante a Pandemia do Coronavírus[Internet].
