ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Personal Protective Equipment in the coronavirus pandemic:
training with Rapid Cycle Deliberate Practice
Equipamento de Proteção Individual na pandemia por coronavírus: treinamento com Prática Deliberada em Ciclos Rápidos
Equipo de Protección Personal en pandemia de coronavirus: entrenamiento con Práctica Deliberada en Ciclos Rápidos
Hudson Carmo de OliveiraI
Lucimar Casimiro de SouzaI,II
Taina Coutinho LeiteI,III
Juliana Faria CamposI
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro. Rio de Janeiro,
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Hospital Samaritano. Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Hospital Pró-Cardíaco. Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Oliveira HC, Souza LC, Leite TC, Campos JF. Personal
Protective Equipment in the coronavirus pandemic:
training with Rapid Cycle Deliberate Practice.
Hudson Carmo de Oliveira
Objective: to discuss the application of Rapid Cycle Deliberate Practice for attire and unattire
training in the context of COVID-19 and structure a practical guide to the application at this
juncture. Methods: this methodological study described theoretical and practical aspects of
the application of a simulation strategy as a technological training tool. An application guide
Results: maximizing time in Deliberate Practice, feedback with evidence and psychological
security are the principles of this strategy. The dynamic involves repetition and feedback.
The application guide presents the sequence of actions for attire and unattire. Final
considerations: coping with this pandemic requires appropriate use of personal protective
educational tool for attire/unattire, since it encourages mastery performance.
Descriptors: Simulation Training; Personal Protective Equipment; Covid-19; Pandemics;
Containment of Biohazards.
Objetivo: discutir a aplicação da Prática Deliberada em Ciclos Rápidos para o treinamento
de paramentação e desparamentação no contexto da COVID-19 e estruturar um guia prático
para a aplicação nesta conjuntura. Métodos: estudo metodológico que descreve aspectos
teóricos e práticos da aplicação de uma estratégia de simulação na qualidade de ferramenta
tecnológica de treinamento. Um guia de aplicação foi construído a partir da busca de evidências
provenientes dos principais órgãos de autoridade em saúde do Brasil. Resultados: maximização
do tempo em Prática Deliberada, feedback com evidência e segurança psicológica são os
princípios desta estratégia. A dinâmica envolve repetições e feedbacks. O guia de aplicação
apresenta a sequência de ações para paramentação e desparamentação. Considerações
finais: o enfrentamento desta pandemia requer uso apropriado de Equipamento de Proteção
Individual. Os autores sugerem a Prática Deliberada em Ciclos Rápidos como ferramenta
educacional tecnológica para paramentação/desparamentação, visto que incentiva uma
performance com maestria.
Descritores: Treinamento por Simulação; Equipamento de Proteção Individual; Coronavírus;
Pandemia; Contenção de Riscos Biológicos.
EDITOR IN CHIEF: Dulce Barbosa
ASSOCIATE EDITOR: Antonio José de Almeida Filho
Objetivo: discutir la aplicación de la Práctica Deliberada en Ciclos Rápidos para la formación
de vestimentas y depargaciones en el contexto de COVID-19 y estructurar una guía práctica
para la aplicación en esta coyuntura. Métodos: estudio metodológico que describe aspectos
teóricos y prácticos de la aplicación de una estrategia de simulación como herramienta de
capacitación tecnológica. Se creó una guía de aplicación a partir de la búsqueda de evidencia
de las principales autoridades de salud en Brasil. Resultados: maximizar el tiempo en la
práctica deliberada, la retroalimentación basada en evidencia y la seguridad psicológica son
los principios de esta estrategia. La dinámica implica repeticiones y retroalimentaciones. La
guía de aplicación presenta la secuencia de acciones para vestirse y vestirse. Consideraciones
finales: enfrentar esta pandemia requiere el uso apropiado de Equipo de Protección Personal.
Los autores sugieren la práctica deliberada en ciclos rápidos como una herramienta educativa
tecnológica para vestirse/desvestirse, ya que fomenta un desempeño magistral.
Descriptores: Entrenamiento Simulado; Equipo de Protección Personal; Coronavirus;
Pandemia; Contención de Riesgos Biológicos.
Personal Protective Equipment in the coronavirus pandemic: training with Rapid Cycle Deliberate Practice
Oliveira HC, Souza LC, Leite TC, Campos JF.
The Coronavirus Disease epidemic (COVID-19), caused by the
new coronavirus (Sars-CoV-2), originated in 2019 in the city of
Wuhan, China. In early 2020 it became a pandemic as it hit 24
to nearly two million people infected and nearly 130 thousand
deaths caused by the virus. The countries most affected by
coronavirus disease are the United States, with more than 600
thousand confirmed cases; Italy, Spain, Germany and France, with
more than 100 thousand confirmed cases each; United Kingdom,
with more than 98 thousand cases; and China, with more than 80
thousand confirmed cases. Among those mentioned, all have a
rate of contamination of health professionals(1). Italy, for instance,
had 14,032 cases of contamination of these professionals, with
a lethality rate of 11.8% of those aged between 70 and 79 years
old, and 1.3% among those aged 60-69 years old(2).
Since it is a respiratory transmission virus, personal protective
equipment (PPE) use is essential to contemplate the standard
precautions, contact and droplet measures recommended to face
this pandemic(3). Therefore, an investment in knowledge, training
and qualification of health professionals on proper use of this
equipment in care management of infected patients becomes
indispensable. Proper attire and unattire are an effective way to
avoid contamination among health professionals(4).
A strategy to achieve the proper use of this equipment, as
well as the protection of health professionals, is the implementation and compliance with strict PPE protocols. In 2014,
during the Ebola outbreak, contamination of two health
professionals was associated with probable non-compliance
with these protocols. A study found that approximately half
of the sample of health professionals touched, without gloves,
a potentially contaminated PPE surface and about 26% inappropriately touched the front of the mask(5), which shows the
inappropriate disposal of PPE.
Research shows that all professionals without updating
and who do not practice repeatedly end in stagnant skills or
deviations in techniques, over time(6). In addition, prolonged
periods of non-use of skills, known as retention intervals, lead
to a decline in performance(6). That said, it is significant that
health services provide training for all professionals who will
have or may have contact with people infected with the new
However, conventional training using demonstrations does
not guarantee that the professional will be properly and unparalleled. A study on training and education, in the context of
highly infectious diseases, in emergency services, showed that
professionals felt the need for quality training and lack of sufficient confidence to respond to these diseases(7). Therefore, it is
necessary to conduct training that allows practical implementation of appropriate technique among all participants, in favor of
minimizing technical errors, a fact that implies a reduction in the
risk of contamination of health professionals.
Rapid Cycle Deliberate Practice (RCDP) is a simulation strategy
aimed at improving participants’ performance to achieve mastery
in a skill. It is organized to promote task repetition and provide
immediate evidence-based feedback through an instructor.
Created in a setting of pediatric cardiorespiratory arrest, RCDP
showed improvement in the cardiopulmonary resuscitation skills
of health professionals(8). By assuming that the RCDP should be
applied as a technological tool in other populations and in different contexts of skills, the present study suggests RCDP use
in capacity building and training of attire and unattire of PPE.
Thus, health professionals will perform with mastery when facing
COVID-19. RCDP is an educational technology with an immediate impact on the improvement and technical improvement of
health professionals, meeting the current demand for information
in the health setting.
To discuss the application of Rapid Cycle Deliberate Practice
for training in attire and unattire and to structure a practical guide
to the application of RCDP in attire and unattire of PPE in procedures that generate aerosolization in the context of COVID-19.
This methodological study was structured in two parts: 1)
Explanation of the theoretical and operational aspects for the
applicability of the RCDP in attire and removing the necessary
PPE for procedures that may generate aerosols, in the context of
coping with the COVID-19 pandemic; 2) Construction of a RCDP
application guide at this juncture.
To construct the guide, relevant information was gathered for
attire and unattire the PPE necessary to face COVID-19. The data
were extracted from the main official materials released by the
agencies linked to the Brazilian health area, such as Ministry of
Health, Brazilian National Health Surveillance Agency (Agência
Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária, abbreviated Anvisa), Federal
Nursing Council (Conselho Federal de Enfermagem, abbreviated
COFEN), and Regional Nursing Council (Conselho Regional de
Enfermagem, abbreviated COREN). From the data collected, the
best evidence and recommendations in force were selected.
Respecting the RCDP principles, the guide was built in five
cycles, with specific objectives. The first two cycles refer to proper
attire, and the next three refer to unattire. Each cycle contains
three to eleven tasks considered to be critical points, which are
points whose errors would lead to potential contamination. The
cycles and stages were named as follows: Cycle 1 refers to the
first stage of unattire, Cycle 2 to the second stage of attire, Cycle
3 to Unattire stage I, Cycle 4 to Unattire stage II and Cycle 5 to
Unattire stage III.
THEORICAL ASPECTS OF RAPID CYCLE DELIBERATE PRACTICE
Deliberate Practice is a concept based on studies on skill
acquisition. It was coined by Ericsson et al. in their research on
expertise. It is defined as a series of specific activities that improve the performance of individuals by being subjected to the
following factors: a) task with a defined objective; b) motivation
to improve; c) feedbacks; and d) vast opportunity for repetition
and gradual refinement of performance(9). Rapid Cycle Deliberate
Practice is a simulation strategy created by Hunt et al. in 2014,
Personal Protective Equipment in the coronavirus pandemic: training with Rapid Cycle Deliberate Practice
Oliveira HC, Souza LC, Leite TC, Campos JF.
which appropriated the concept of Deliberate Practice and added
an intense and rapid transition between feedbacks and task
practice in an explored clinical case until the skill was mastered.
This alternation was dubbed the fast cycle(8).
For the proper application of the RCDP, one must be aware
of its three basic principles. The first is called maximizing time in
deliberate practice, in which it is recommended to give several
opportunities to perform the task perfectly. The idea is to seek
to achieve automatization in performance through repetition,
i.e. to create muscle memory to do the right thing. For this to be
possible, it is necessary to receive corrections from an instructor,
in case there is an error in the performance. These corrections are
with evidence(8).
RCDP feedbacks are classified as directed and immediate. They
are provided after an error is detected. Thus, it is understood
that the instructor will make interruptions to explain the most
appropriate way to perform that task, according to the existing
scientific evidence, or even from the consensus of experts. This
means that coaches need to master the training topic, in addition to possessing ownership and confidence in the application
of the RCDP. After feedback, participants are asked to go back
10 seconds and perform the task again(8). In case of an error, a
new block is performed, creating a quick cycle between task,
interruption and feedback. The dynamics of interruptions can
Doing again
Going back
Cycle Deliberate Practice
In order for these interruptions to be accepted favorably and to
prevent participants from behaving defensively, it is necessary to
ensure a partnership agreement between coach and participant.
Training should not be started without an understanding that
interruptions are essential to achieving mastery performance. It
is noteworthy that Hunt et al. call this style as coaching(8) . With
this, the third principle is explicit psychological security.
RAPID CYCLE DELIBERATE PRACTICE OPERATING ASPECTS
IN THE ATTIRE AND UNATTIRE
Having understood the three principles of the RCDP, the training dynamics is discussed. A minimum of two and a maximum of
five participants are suggested. The first action of RCDP training
is to ensure psychological security. At this point, the trainer must
explain the dynamics of the simulation. He/she should stress that
his/her role is to help participants improve their performance,
in order to create muscle memory to perform the attire and
unattire without errors and that this will bring benefits to avoid
contamination by Sars-CoV-2. He/she must also inform about the
possibility of several interruptions necessary to hear feedback,
but which will be resumed immediately after the feedback, taking into account the explanations given. All of these instructions
must be verbally welcoming and charismatic, in accordance with
the RCDP’s own coaching style.
When guaranteeing the third principle of the RCDP, the trainer
demonstrates all the equipment, inputs and items existing in
the simulation and chooses a participant to start the setting
(or decide together). The trainer then narrates the clinical case
and declares the start of training. The chosen one begins to
carry out the activities. The other participants are positioned
on the sides so that they can hear feedback. In case of a critical error, participants are interrupted. At this point, immediate
and targeted feedback should take place. Targeted feedback
means that the trainer must make the information explicit,
always based on the best evidence available. This proved to be
more efficient than encouraging participants to try to answer
or look for the answer(8).
This is an interesting aspect of RCDP, since in the scope of
simulation, some techniques, such as debriefing, encourage selfperception and self-reflection, in which the facilitator exercises
the function of guiding thinking so that participants and their
group find their conclusions. RCDP goes against the grain, as
it does not aim at reflective debates, but focuses on task repetition, aiming at the creation of muscular memory to act with
mastery. Therefore, it is essential to provide explicit evidence for
participants to receive it, understand its importance and return
to practice as soon as possible.
To exemplify the targeted feedback, one can imagine a situation in which participants forget to mold the nose support on
the respiratory protection mask. In this case, the trainer must say
“It is necessary to mold the nose on the mask so that the correct
sealing occurs, according to Anvisa’s Technical Note 4 of 2020”. If
participants keep the error, the trainer interrupts them by saying
“Let’s stop, go back 10 seconds and try again”(8).
Participants who started training continue to train and receive feedback until the end of the first cycle. Upon completing
it perfectly, the initiator takes his/her position with another
participant, taking the place of observer. This happens until
everyone has completed the first cycle. This dynamic is repeated
until the end of the training. It is worth mentioning that before
starting any cycle, the participants of the turn must perform all
the tasks of the first cycle and proceed with the second and so
on. Participants must always start in the first cycle.
Personal Protective Equipment in the coronavirus pandemic: training with Rapid Cycle Deliberate Practice
Oliveira HC, Souza LC, Leite TC, Campos JF.
RAPID CYCLE DELIBERATE PRACTICE APPLICATION GUIDE
Chart 1 - Guide to Rapid Cycle Deliberate Practice in attire and unattire for
professionals who work less than 1 meter from the suspected or confirmed
patient with the new coronavirus infection and who perform procedures
with risk of aerosol generation
Disposing in infectious garbage;
Hand hygiene with 70% alcohol for 20 to 30 seconds;
Cycle 5 - Unattire Stage III
Going outside the room or antechamber (without surgical gown and
Cycle 1 - Attire stage I
Hand hygiene with 70% alcohol for 20 to 30 seconds;
Hand hygiene;
Removing the cap by the inner region;
Wearing surgical gown;
Disposing in infectious garbage;
Tying the surgical gown properly (so it doesn’t fall off );
Hand hygiene with 70% alcohol for 20 to 30 seconds;
Cycle 2 - Attire stage II
Removing safety glasses or face shield (covering the front and side of
the face, holding from the sides and supporting it on a surface*2);
Assessing conditions* of the respiratory protection mask (particulate
up to 0.3μ (N95, N99, N100, PFF2 or PFF3);
Hand hygiene;
(In the case of a new mask) Holding the outside in the shape of a cup
and approaching the nose and mouth;
Removing the mask by the side elastics without touching the inner
surface (NEVER holding the front of the mask). Pulling in the upperanterior direction;
(In case of already used mask) Putting on gloves before holding by the
Packing the mask in a paper envelope*3 with the elastics out, to
facilitate the removal of the mask;
With the other hand, directing the elastics of the mask to the back of
the head, one at a time;
Hand hygiene;
Shaping the nose support;
Performing sealing test of the respiratory protection mask;
(In case of already used mask) Removing the glove, discarding it and
hand hygiene;
Putting safety glasses or face shield, which covers the front and side
of the face;
Putting on cap;
Going to the room or area where the patient is;
Hand hygiene with 70% alcohol for 20-30 seconds;
Cycle 3 - Unattire Stage I
Not leaving the patient’s room;
Removing gloves by pulling the first one from the outside of the wrist
with the fingers of the opposite hand;
Holding the removed glove with the other gloved hand;
Touching the inside of the gloved hand’s wrist with the opposite index
finger (without gloves) and removing the other glove;
Disposing the glove in infectious waste;
Hand hygiene with 70% alcohol for 20-30 seconds;
Cycle 4 - Unattire Stage II
Untying the bottom of the surgical gown;
Untying the top of the surgical gown, keeping your hand in the
Holding the surgical gown from the inside;
Pulling it in the anterior-inferior direction (extending the forearms);
With the right hand, holding the surgical gown close to the wrist of
the left hand;
Pulling the left hand;
With the left hand, holding the surgical gown close to the wrist of the
right hand;
Pulling the right hand;
At the end of separation, wearing gloves to clean the safety glasses or
the face shield and the area where they were supported.
Note: *1Inspect mask integrity (damp, dirty, torn, dented or creased masks cannot be used) and make
sure that strips, nasal bridge and nasal foam material are not degraded(4); *2 Safety glasses should be
used exclusively by each professional, should be cleaned with water and soap and then disinfected
with 70% liquid alcohol, sodium hypochlorite or another disinfectant recommended by the manufacturer(4); *3Plastic or other materials can be used, as long as they are not hermetically sealed. Never
place the used mask in a closed plastic bag, as it may become damp and potentially contaminated(4).
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS
in the attire and unattire of the personal protective equipment
needed to cope with coronavirus disease (COVID-19). This theme
is different from the original context of creating the RCDP strategy.
It was carried out in a pediatric cardiopulmonary resuscitation
encourage research to be carried out to test the applicability of
RCDP in other situations and institutions. Due to the Sars-CoV-2
pandemic and the growing need for quality training in attire and
unattire, we suggest the RCDP strategy as a technological tool in
the educational field. It must be applied to train health professionals in order to achieve mastery in the skill of attire, avoiding
contamination by the virus.
Due to the emergency situation of COVID-19, in addition to
the discussion as to the applicability of the RCDP in vesting and
creating the RCDP application guide. Adjustments can be made
in this guide both to meet the reality of the institutions and to
to the validation of the guide by specialists. It is suggested that
clinical studies be conducted to generate concrete results on the
applicability of RCDP in this perspective.
Academic Excellence Program of Coordination of Superior
Level Staff Improvement - Ministry of Education of Brazil.
Holding the inside of the surgical gown and fold it;
To be continued
Personal Protective Equipment in the coronavirus pandemic: training with Rapid Cycle Deliberate Practice
Oliveira HC, Souza LC, Leite TC, Campos JF.
World Health Organization. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) Situation report -87 [Internet]. 2020[cited 2020 May 02]. Available from:
Task force COVID-19 del Dipartimento Malattie Infettive e Servizio di Informatica, Istituto Superiore di Sanità. Epidemia COVID-19,
Holland M, Zaloga DJ, Friderici CS. COVID-19: Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) for the emergency physician. Vis J Emerg Med.
Ministério da Saúde (BR). Anvisa. Nota Técnica nº 04/2020. Orientações para serviços de saúde: medidas de prevenção e
controle que devem ser adotadas durante a assistência aos casos suspeitos ou confirmados de infecção pelo novo coronavírus
Kantor J. Behavioral considerations and impact on personal protective equipment (PPE) use: Early lessons from the coronavirus (COVID-19)
LE AB, Buehler SA, Maniscalco PM, Lane P, Rupp LE, Ernest E, et al. Determining training and education needs pertaining to highly
infectious disease preparedness and response: a gap analysis survey of US emergency medical services practitioners. Am J Infect Control.
Hunt EA, Duval-Arnould JM, Nelson-McMillan KL, Bradshaw JH, Diener-West M, Perretta JS, et al. Pediatric resident resuscitation skills
