TPP0010.1177/2045125320935306Therapeutic Advances in PsychopharmacologyD Bishara, C Kalafatis
Therapeutic Advances in Psychopharmacology
Emerging and experimental treatments
for COVID-19 and drug interactions with
psychotropic agents
Delia Bishara
Ther Adv Psychopharmacol
, Chris Kalafatis and David Taylor
Abstract: As yet, no agents have been approved for the treatment of COVID-19, although
several experimental drugs are being used off licence. These may have serious adverse
agents being used across the world for the treatment of COVID-19 and investigated their drug
interaction potential with psychotropic agents using several drug interaction databases and
resources. A preliminary search identified the following drugs as being used to treat COVID-19
symptoms: atazanavir (ATV), azithromycin (AZI), chloroquine (CLQ)/hydroxychloroquine
(HCLQ), dipyridamole, famotidine (FAM), favipiravir, lopinavir/ritonavir (LPV/r), nitazoxanide,
remdesivir, ribavirin and tocilizumab. Many serious adverse effects and potential drug
interactions with psychotropic agents were identified. The most problematic agents were
found to be ATV, AZI, CLQ, HCLQ, FAM and LPV/r in terms of both pharmacokinetic as well
as serious pharmacodynamic drug interactions, including QTc prolongation and neutropenia.
Significant caution should be exercised if using any of the medications being trialled for the
treatment of COVID-19 until robust clinical trial data are available. An even higher threshold of
vigilance should be maintained for patients with pre-existing conditions and older adults due
to added toxicity and drug interactions, especially with psychotropic agents.
Keywords: adverse effects, drug-interactions, psychotropic drugs, treatment COVID-19
Although no treatments have been approved or
shown to be safe and effective for the treatment of
COVID-19, there are several treatments being
used off licence either on a compassionate-use basis
or as part of a randomised controlled trial. The
South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation
Trust does not currently recommend initiating
these drugs. However, clinicians need to be aware
of their adverse effects and potential drug interactions with psychotropic agents in case they are prescribed elsewhere to patients from our services.
Serious adverse effects are associated with these
drugs, and these may overlap with the clinical manifestations of COVID-19. Chloroquine (CLQ)/
hydroxychloroquine (HCLQ), azithromycin (AZI),
and lopinavir/ritonavir (LPV/r) are associated with a
range of adverse effects, including QTc prolongation, torsade de pointes, hepatitis, acute pancreatitis
and neutropenia.1 Considering that most patients
who have died from COVID-19 were elderly and
had underlying health conditions including cardiovascular comorbidities, CLQ/HCLQ, AZI, and
LPV/r could potentially increase the risk of cardiac
death. In addition, hepatitis and leucopoenia are
clinical manifestations of COVID-19, and so the
use of these drugs could worsen both hepatic and
bone marrow dysfunction. It would also be almost
impossible to differentiate the drug-related adverse
effects from the disease manifestations.1
Correspondence to:
Delia Bishara
Maudsley Hospital,
Denmark Hill,
Camberwell, London SE5
Chris Kalafatis
David Taylor
South London and
Maudsley NHS Foundation
Trust, London, UK
Several clinical trials are currently underway. The
World Health Organisation and its partners have
launched the Solidarity trial,2 a large international
study to compare different treatments and ensure
Therapeutic Advances in Psychopharmacology 10
clear evidence of which treatments are most effective. The study will have five arms: standard of
Oxford have launched the Recovery trial,3 which
will be testing some of these suggested treatments: LPV/r, low-dose dexamethasone, HCLQ
and inhaled IFN-beta1a.
main experimental drugs that are being trialled or
used off licence to treat patients with COVID-19.
For each drug we aimed to examine trial outcome
data, dosing regimens, adverse effects, drug interaction potential and specific drug interactions
with commonly used psychotropic agents in the
United Kingdom (UK).
A preliminary search identified several drugs that
were being used off licence around the world for
the treatment of COVID-19 either as part of a clinical trial or on a compassionate basis. For each
potential adverse effects. We then used the following drug-interaction databases and on-line
resources to identify potential drug interactions
with the commonly used psychotropic agents in
the UK: Stockley’s Drug Interactions Checker,
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) drug interactions website, drug interaction checker, the
Drugbank and the Liverpool Drug Interactions
Adverse effects. ATV can cause serious, lifethreatening adverse effects, including heart rhythm
abnormalities, severe rash and hepatic disorders, as
well as life-threatening drug interactions.
Drug interactions. ATV is metabolised principally
by cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4. It is an inhibitor
of CYP3A4 and a weak inhibitor of CYP2C8.
When co-administered with ATV, increased serum
levels of psychotropics that are substrates of
CYP3A4 can occur. This is especially true for lurasidone, quetiapine and ziprasidone. Their levels
can be raised significantly, thus increasing the risk
of serious adverse effects, including prolongation
of QTc interval. These combinations should be
avoided if possible. Other CYP3A4 substrates, such
­aripiprazole, clozapine, haloperidol, ­iloperidone,
risperidone and zuclopentixol, as well as some
benzodiazepines (e.g. clonazepam, diazepam and
midazolam) and certain antidepressants (e.g.
­citalopram, escitalopram, clomipramine, imipramine and mirtazapine, amongst others) can also
be affected in the same way when co-­administered
with ATV and may require dose adjustments or
monitoring. Carbamazepine and ATV together
can lead to increased levels of carbamazepine and
reduced levels of ATV and this combination
with drugs highly dependent on CYP2C8 with
narrow therapeutic indices is not recommended
(no psychotropic meets this definition).
For each drug identified, trial outcome data, dosing
regimens, adverse effects and drug interaction potential are reported in the following. For specific drug
Dose-related asymptomatic prolongations in the
PR interval with ATV have been observed in clinical studies. Caution should be used when prescribing ATV with medicinal products that have
the potential to increase the QT interval; a potential effect of many antipsychotic drugs and some
antidepressants, and/or in patients with pre-existing risk factors (bradycardia, long congenital QT,
electrolyte imbalances according to the Liverpool
An antiretroviral medication used to treat and prevent the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
AZI is a macrolide antibiotic used in combination
with HCLQ (for dosage information see HCLQ).
Dosage information. Some reports have emerged
where the following regimen was used for
COVID-19 pneumonia: ATV 400 mg daily for
2 weeks in combination with oseltamivir 150 mg
twice daily +/– methylprednisolone 40 mg twice
data for its use to support this.
Adverse effects. Adverse effects include gastrointestinal effects, arrhythmias, QT prolongation
and hepatic disorders.
Drug interactions. AZI does not interact significantly with the hepatic cytochrome P450 system.
It is not believed to undergo pharmacokinetic
D Bishara, C Kalafatis et al.
Mood stabilisers
Therapeutic Advances in Psychopharmacology 10
Text Legend
Potential increase exposure of drug specified
Potential decrease exposure of drug specified
No significant effect on drug serum levels
One or both drugs may cause QT and/or PR prolongation. ECG monitoring advised
One or both drugs may cause bone marrow suppression. Monitor FBC
One or more drugs may reduce seizure threshold. Monitor closely.
Theoretical drug interaction based on CYP metabolism, however no specific reports
These drugs should not be co-administered
Potential interaction which may require a dose adjustment or close monitoring
Potential interaction likely to be of weak intensity. Additional action/monitoring or dosage adjustment unlikely to be required
No clinically significant interaction expected
ATV, atazanavir; AZI, azithromycin; CLQ, chloroquine; CYP, cytochrome P450; DIP, dipyridamole; ECG, electrocardiogram; FAM, famotidine; FAVI, favipiravir; FBC, full blood count; HCLQ,
hydroxychloroquine; LPV/r, lopinavir/ritonavir; NITAZ, nitazoxanide; RDV, remdesivir; RBV, ribavirin; TCZ, tocilizumab.
Dementia drugs
D Bishara, C Kalafatis et al.
Therapeutic Advances in Psychopharmacology 10
drug interactions. Hepatic cytochrome P450
induction or inactivation via cytochromemetabolite complex does not occur with AZI.
AZI is known to be a P-glycoprotein (P-gp)
inhibitor and, if co-administered with P-gp substrates (e.g. digoxin, colchicine), it has been
reported to result in increased serum levels,
requiring monitoring.10 Psychotropics are not
known to be P-gp substrates.
Whilst pharmacokinetic drug interactions are not
a problem with AZI, it is important to note that
serious pharmacodynamic drug interactions do
exist when co-administered with psychotropic
agents. Since QTc prolongation can be an effect
exercised when used together as the risk for QTc
prolongation is further increased. In addition,
some psychotropics are known to cause neutropenia or agranulocytosis (particularly clozapine and
carbamazepine), which is also a potential adverse
effect of AZI.
Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine
CLQ and HCLQ are oral drugs that have been
used for the prophylaxis and treatment of malaria,
and the treatment of certain inflammatory conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis and systemic
lupus erythematosus. Both drugs are currently
being trialled in patients with mild-to-severe
COVID-19.2 HCQL is also being trialled for
post-exposure prophylaxis to prevent progression
to symptomatic disease after known exposure.
CLQ is being trialled for prevention of COVID19 in the healthcare setting.11
Chloroquine. Use of CLQ is included in treatment guidelines from China’s National Health
Commission and was reportedly associated with
reduced progression of disease and decreased
China recommends CLQ in mild to severe cases
of COVID-19 as it may improve the success rate
of treatment, shorten hospital stay and improve
patient outcome.12
Dosing information. According to a consensus
statement from a multicentre collaboration group
diagnosed as having mild, moderate or severe
cases of novel coronavirus pneumonia and without contraindications to CLQ.12
Hydroxychloroquine. There is a considerable
interest for the use of HCLQ to treat COVID-19
disease; however, significant methodological limitations do not allow for definitive conclusions.
A small randomised controlled trial (20 patients)
found that HCLQ (with or without AZI) was efficient in reducing viral nasopharyngeal carriage of
SARS-CoV-2 in 3–6 days in most patients. The
addition of AZI (to six patients) was thought to be
synergistic and the combination was found to be
significantly more efficient for virus elimination13;
however the sample was small, the majority of
patients presented with mild symptoms and the
suffered from other significant co-morbidities.
A similar combination trial of HCLQ and AZI in 11
participants did not replicate the previously mentioned results. Crucially, 8 out of 11 had significant
comorbidities associated with poor outcomes.14
Another randomised open-label study in 30
Chinese participants (1:1 randomisation) did not
offer conclusive results on the efficacy of HCLQ.15
The only publicly available randomised control
trial of HCLQ in 62 Chinese participants remains
HCLQ /AZI combination is associated with high
risk of QTc prolongation. In 84 adult patients with
SARS-CoV-2 infection treated with this combination, QTc was significantly prolonged from baseline between days 3 and 4. In 30% of patients QTc
increased by greater than 40 ms. In 11% of patients
QTc increased to >500 ms, representing a high
risk group for arrhythmia. The development of
acute renal failure but not baseline QTc was a
strong predictor of extreme QTc prolongation.17
Dosing information. HCLQ 200 mg three times
a day for 10 days. (Recent studies linking HCLQ
treatment to viral load reduction in COVID-19
patients did so with higher dose treatment, using
either a 600 mg daily dose or 1000 mg daily dose).18
AZI dosage used was (500 mg daily day 1 followed
by 250 mg per day, the next 4 days). It has been
suggested that early treatment is ­important.3
D Bishara, C Kalafatis et al.
Adverse effects for CLQ/HCLQ. Gastrointestinal
effects, such as vomiting and diarrhoea, are the
most common adverse effects of these two drugs.
Patients with long-term exposure to CLQ suffer
from severe side effects such as retinopathy and
cardiotoxic effects.19 CLQ and HCLQ have been
shown to prolong the QTc interval in some
patients and should therefore be used with caution in patients receiving concomitant drugs
known to prolong the QT interval or where a
drug interaction may increase CLQ or HCLQ
exposure (see drug interactions in the following).
Electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring would be
recommended in these instances.9 Caution is also
advised when considering these drugs in patients
with chronic medical conditions (e.g. renal failure, hepatic disease).
HCLQ has similar therapeutic effects to CLQ,
but less severe adverse effects. It is considered
safe in pregnancy and is more readily available in
some countries. More importantly, the maximum
dose for HCLQ is 1200 mg, which has an antiviral effect equivalent to 750 mg CLQ (for which
the maximum tolerable dose can be 500 mg).
Hence, HCLQ can be administered at a higher
equivalent dosage and may therefore achieve
more powerful antiviral effect.20
The United States Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) has recently issued a warning that CLQ
and HCLQ should be used for COVID-19 only
when patients can be appropriately monitored in
the hospital setting or are enrolled in a clinical
trial with appropriate screening and monitoring.
use for COVID-19 outside the hospital setting
after reports of QT interval prolongation and ventricular tachycardia.21
Drug interactions. CLQ and HCLQ undergo
CYP-mediated metabolism by CYPs 2C8, 3A4
and 2D6. Co-administration with inhibitors and
inducers of these isoenzymes may increase or
decrease exposure to them, respectively, and dose
changes or additional monitoring could be considered. Fluoxetine and paroxetine are inhibitors of
both CYP3A4 and CYP2D6 and can therefore
lead to increased levels of CLQ and HCLQ, in
turn increasing the risk of QTc prolongation.
Other psychotropics that are important inhibitors
of CYP2D6 include amitriptyline, bupropion and
duloxetine. Carbamazepine induces CYP3A4 and
can lead to reduced levels of CLQ and HCLQ.
CLQ and HCLQ are moderate inhibitors of
CYP2D6 and P-gp, and caution may be required
when co-administering medication with a narrow
therapeutic index that are metabolised or transported by these pathways.9 Psychotropics that are
substrates of CYP2D6 and that will undergo
reduced metabolism and have increased levels
when co-administered with these drugs include
aripiprazole, chlorpromazine, iloperidone, olanzapine, risperidone, zuclopentixol, clomipramine,
The following pharmacodynamic drug ­interactions
should be considered carefully. Since CLQ and
HCLQ have been shown to prolong QTc interval,
caution should be used when co-administered
with most antipsychotics and some antidepressant
drugs, such as tricyclic antidepressants, c­ italopram,
escitalopram, venlafaxine, trazodone and lithium
addition, CLQ and HCLQ have been reported to
cause bone marrow failure, neutropenia and
agranulocytosis Therefore, co-administration with
carbamazepine should be avoided, and if used
with clozapine, cautious use and close monitoring
are advised. Furthermore, CLQ and HCLQ may
lower the convulsive threshold and thus ­antagonise
the actions of antiepileptics such as c­ arbamazepine,
lamotrigine or sodium valproate. They should also
be used with caution with bupropion, which can
also reduce seizure threshold.
Dipyridamole (DIP) is an antiplatelet agent and
acts as a phosphodiesterase (PDE) inhibitor that
increases intracellular cAMP/cGMP. Apart from
the well-known antiplatelet function, DIP may
provide potential therapeutic benefits to patients
clinical trials conducted in China, have demonstrated that it has a broad spectrum antiviral
activity, particularly efficacious against positivestranded RNA viruses; it suppresses inflammation and promotes mucosal healing, and, as a
pan-PDE inhibitor, it may also prevent acute
injury and progressive fibrosis of the lung, heart,
liver and kidneys.22
COVID-19 infection can cause acute respiratory distress syndrome, hypercoagulability,
hypertension and multiorgan dysfunction. In
an analysis of a randomly collected cohort of
124 patients with the disease, researchers
from China found that hypercoagulability as
Therapeutic Advances in Psychopharmacology 10
indicated by elevated concentrations of
D-dimers was associated with disease severity. They identified DIP, which suppressed
COVID-19 replication in vitro. 22
Dosage information. The daily treatment protocol
comprises oral DIP 150 mg in three separate
doses for 14 consecutive days.
Adverse effects. Gastrointestinal adverse effects
are common with DIP, and thrombocytopenia
and tachycardia have been reported although frequency is not known.23 Because DIP is a PDE
inhibitor and can exacerbate bronchospasm (frequency not known), particularly in patients with
reactive airway disease and/or chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). Therapy with DIP is
contraindicated in patients with active wheezing
and should be administered cautiously in patients
with asthma or COPD and therefore in COVID19 patients as well.24
Drug interactions. Metabolism of DIP occurs in
the liver. DIP is metabolized by conjugation with
glucuronic acid to form mainly a monoglucuronide and only small amounts of diglucuronide. In
plasma, about 80% of the total amount is parent
compound, 20% of the total amount is monoglucuronide with oral administration.23
The bleeding risk associated with DIP might be
further increased by the concurrent use of a serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SRIs). Serotonin
release by platelets plays an important role in
have documented the occurrence of bleeding episodes in patients treated with psychotropic agents
that interfere with serotonin reuptake. Bleeding
events related to SRIs have ranged from ecchymosis, haematoma, epistaxis and petechiae to
life-threatening haemorrhages.25 Therefore, caution should be used with citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine, paroxetine and sertraline as
well as clomipramine, duloxetine, venlafaxine
and vortioxetine. Monitor closely for bleeding.
Gastroprotection (such as a proton pump inhibitor) in those at high risk of gastrointestinal bleeding (e.g. history of gastrointestinal bleeding, the
elderly) should be considered.4
DIP may also increase the hypotensive effect of
psychotropic drugs that reduce blood pressure
and may counteract the anticholinesterase effect
of cholinesterase inhibitors.23,26
Famotidine (FAM) is a H2 antagonist use to treat
heartburn, ulcers and Zollinger–Ellison syndrome. Earlier in the outbreak, doctors who
worked with coronavirus patients in Wuhan,
China discovered that, although one in five
COVID-19 patients over the age of 80 died, many
of those who survived had been taking the heartburn medication FAM. In fact, hospitalized
COVID-19 patients on FAM appeared to be
dying at a rate of about 14% compared with 27%
for those not on the drug, and, although the analysis was crude, the result was not statistically significant and studies on the Chinese patients have
to encourage US scientists to explore FAM’s
As part of a clinical trial, patients at New York
City’s Northwell Health have been receiving
FAM intravenously, at a dose nine times greater
than what people typically take for heartburn
(specific dosing details are not available). The
randomised, double-blind trial, which began on
7 April 2020, has enrolled 187 participants to
date, but expects to expand to a total of 1174
individuals in critical status, including many on
Adverse effects. ECG changes are seen; prolonged QT interval has been reported in patients
with moderate-to-severe renal impairment. The
FDA has received reports of torsades de pointes
occurring with FAM. There have also been rare
reports of seizures, thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, agranulocytosis, pancytopenia intrahepatic
cholestasis, jaundice and increased liver enzyme
abnormalities. In addition, it can very rarely cause
psychiatric effects such as depression, anxiety and
Drug interactions. FAM is considered a weak
CYP1A2 inhibitor and may lead to substantial
increases in blood concentrations of CYP1A2
substrates. Whilst there are no reports, theoretically, co-administration can lead to increased levels of clozapine, olanzapine and agomelatine as
they are predominantly CYP 1A2 substrates.29
FAM may cause QTc prolongation. Theoretically,
coadministration with other agents that can prolong the QT interval may result in additive effects
and increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias
including torsade de pointes and sudden death.
According to the manufacturer, prolongation of
D Bishara, C Kalafatis et al.
the QT interval has been reported very rarely in
patients with impaired renal function whose dose/
dosing interval of FAM may not have been
adjusted appropriately. In general, the risk of an
individual agent, or a combination of these agents,
causing ventricular arrhythmia in association with
be increased by certain underlying risk factors
such as congenital long QT syndrome, cardiac
disease and electrolyte disturbances (e.g. hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia). In addition, the extent
of drug-induced QT prolongation is dependent on
the particular drug(s) involved and dosage(s) of
the drug(s). Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors may
have vagotonic effects on the sinoatrial and atrioventricular nodes, which occasionally manifest as
bradycardia or heart block (<2%). Because bradycardia is a risk factor for torsade de pointes, a
theoretical risk exists when combined with agents
drug interactions with psychotropic agents.
Favipiravir (FAVI) is an anti-viral drug [used in
severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS)] that
has secured approval from the National Medical
Products Administration of China to treat coronavirus COVID-19. An open-label study compared FAVI (35 patients) with LPV/r (45 patients)
for the treatment of COVID-19.31 FAVI was
noted to have shown significantly better treatment effects on COVID-19 in terms of disease
progression and viral clearance.
Available dosage information. Patients in the
study received oral FAVI (day 1: 1600 mg twice
daily; day 2–14 600 mg twice daily) plus IFN-α by
aerosol inhalation (5 million U twice daily) or
LPV/r (days 1–14: 400 mg/100 mg twice daily
plus IFN-α by aerosol inhalation (5 million U
twice daily).31
Adverse effects. In the small study described previously, two patients reported diarrhoea, one had
liver injury and one had poor diet.31
Drug interactions. FAVI is a weak inhibitor of
CYPs 1A2, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1 and 3A4 and
showed little or no induction of CYPs 1A2, 2C9,
2C19 and 3A4 in human hepatocytes. FAVI
inhibits CYP2C8 and caution is required in combination with drugs metabolised via this route. It
is also a moderate inhibitor of OAT1 and OAT3.
A study showed increased areas under the plasma
concentration-time curves (AUC) of paracetamol,
and as a result maximum dose should be 3000 mg/
day. The QT interval prolongation risk is considered to be low with FAVI.9
Based on the information previously mentioned,
some psychotropic levels are expected be
increased due to weak CYP inhibition by FAVI,
but since there are no reports of this, they are
not therefore be required but it is important to be
aware of a potential interaction. Caution is recommended when FAVI is co-administered with
zopiclone as it is a CYP2C8 substrate.
LPV/r is an oral antiretroviral protease inhibitor
currently approved for the treatment of HIV
infection. LPV/r has been used in clinical trials for
the treatment of COVID-19. Results from one
small case series found that evidence of clinical
benefit with LPV/r was equivocal.32 A randomised
controlled trial of 199 patients in China found
that treatment with LPV/r was not beneficial
compared with standard care alone (primary outcome was time to improvement) in hospitalised
patients with severe COVID-19.12
Dosing information. LPV/r (400 mg and 100 mg)
orally twice daily, plus standard care for 14 days
was used in the clinical trial.33
Adverse effects. In the trial, gastrointestinal
adverse events including nausea, vomiting and
diarrhoea were more common in the LPV/r group
than in the standard-care group, but serious
adverse events were more common in the standard-care group.
Drug interactions. Lopinavir is metabolised extensively by the hepatic cytochrome P450 system,
almost exclusively by CYP3A. Ritonavir is also
noted to be extensively metabolised by the CYP3A
isozyme family and to a lesser extent by the
CYP2D6 isoform. Ritonavir is a potent CYP3A
and CYP2D6 inhibitor, and is given with lopinavir
to increase plasma levels of lopinavir. Ritonavir may
induce glucuronidation and oxidation by CYP1A2,
CYP2C8, CYP2C9 and CYP2C19, thereby
increasing the biotransformation of some drugs
metabolised by these pathways. This may result in
decreased systemic exposure of these agents.34
Therapeutic Advances in Psychopharmacology 10
As carbamazepine is a potent inducer and a substrate of CYP3A4, co-administration can lead to
both reduced LPV/r levels and increased carbamazepine levels. Many psychotropic drugs are
metabolised by CYP3A4, and so the majority will
experience reduced metabolism and increased
serum levels when administered with LPV/r (see
highest with lurasidone, quetiapine and ziprasidone, and these combinations should be avoided.
In contrast, the following psychotropics are
expected to have reduced serum levels when
administered with LPV/r: olanzapine, agomelatine, bupropion, sertraline, lamotrigine, valproate
and methadone. Of the psychotropics evaluated,
the levels of the following drugs are not expected
to be affected: amisulpride, sulpiride, phenelzine,
lorazepam, oxazepam, lithium, rivastigmine,
memantine and pregabalin. For duloxetine and
paroxetine, there are reports of both increase and
decrease in levels when given with LPV/r.
LPV/r has been shown to cause modest asymptomatic prolongation of the PR interval in some
healthy adult subjects. Rare reports of 2nd and 3rd
degree atrioventricular block in patients with
underlying structural heart disease and pre-existing conduction system abnormalities in patients
receiving drugs known to prolong the PR interval
(e.g. verapamil or ATV) have been reported. LPV/r
should be used with caution in such patients.9 As
many antipsychotic drugs, some antidepressants
and lithium can also cause cardiac adverse effects,
co-administration with LPV/r can cause pharmacodynamic drug interactions leading to increased
cardiac risks. In addition, LPV/r is reported to
commonly cause respiratory infections and neutropenia, both of these will be added risk factors in
patients with COVID-19, especially in those on
psychotropics that can also cause neutropenia, for
example clozapine and carbamazepine.
Nitazoxanide (NITAZ) an antiprotozoal that is
currently FDA approved for treating cryptosporidium and giardia shown to have broad antiviral activity and has been approved in some
countries for treating noro and rota viruses.35
Proposed dosing regimen36
1) HCLQ 400 mg twice a day for 2–3 days
(loading) then 200 mg twice a day for
2) NITAZ (600 mg -SR tabs) twice a day; if
unavailable, using the immediate release
formulation 500 mg three times a day for
7 days (absorption better with food) should
achieve adequate trough levels that easily
exceeds the EC50 of SARS-CoV2. The
duration of treatment can likely be adjusted
based on clinical response.
Adverse effects. NITAZ has an excellent safety
record, though some gastrointestinal adverse
effects are reported.
Drug interactions. Although no drug–drug interaction studies have been conducted in vivo, it is
expected that no significant interactions would
occur when NITAZ is co-administered with drugs
that either are metabolised by or inhibit CYP 450
enzymes. Caution should, however, be used when
administering NITAZ concurrently with other
highly plasma protein-bound drugs with narrow
therapeutic index, as competition for binding
sites may occur. NITAZ can therefore increase
adverse effects of benzodiazepines is recommended, especially with regards to respiratory
depression as this can be an issue in patients with
COVID-19, who already may be experiencing
respiratory distress.
When administered with food, the AUC of
NITAZ in oral form increased by around 50%
and subsequently is recommended to be taken
with food. No clinically significant effect on QTc
prolongation has been observed.9
Remdesivir-GS-5734® (RDV) is a novel, investigational, intravenous nucleoside analogue (originally
used to treat Ebola) with broad antiviral activity
that shows in vitro activity against severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).38
Several clinical trials with RDV are underway in
patients with mild-to-severe COVID-19.39 It has
been used on a compassionate-use basis in areas
where clinical trials are not available; however, the
manufacturer has paused access to the drug via
this route due to overwhelming demand while they
transition to an expanded access programme.
Exceptions will be made for patients with severe
illness, and pregnant women and children with
confirmed infection.40
D Bishara, C Kalafatis et al.
In a recent cohort of 61 hospitalised patients who
received RDV on a compassionate basis, clinical
improvement was observed in 36 of 53 patients
(68%). A total of 25 patients (47%) were discharged, and 7 patients (13%) died.41
Dosing information. Limited data available; dosing used in clinical trials: 200 mg as a single dose
on day 1, followed by 100 mg once daily until day
5 or 10 in addition to standard care.42,43
Adverse effects. The information on adverse
effects is also limited however it has been reported
to cause nausea and increase liver enzymes (which
may or may not indicate liver damage). It does
not prolong QTc interval.44
Drug interactions. Based on rapid distribution,
metabolism and clearance, the likelihood of clinically significant interactions is low. RDV is a substrate of CYP 2C8, CYP 2D6, CYP 3A4 and
transporters OATP1B1 and P-gp in vitro, but coadministration with inhibitors of these CYP isoforms and transporters is unlikely to increase its
levels.9 RDV can be impacted by strong inducers
(e.g. carbamazepine) thus co-administration is not
recommended. RDV is an inducer of CYP 1A2
and CYP 2B6 in vitro but, considering the exposure, it is unlikely to translate into clinically significant interaction with substrates of these enzymes.9
However, caution should be used when co-administered with clozapine (CYP1A2 substrate) and
methadone (CYP2B6 substrate) as, theoretically,
for effects on other psychotropics as well).
Since there are limited data on the tolerability
and adverse effect profile of RDV, it is difficult
to predict whether any pharmacodynamic interactions with psychotropics exist. Reports of
increased liver enzymes may suggest that monitoring may be warranted in some patients, especially if co-prescribed psychotropics that can
also increase liver enzymes or affect liver function for example, agomelatine, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, carbamazepine or haloperidol.
Ribavirin (RBV) is an antiviral used to treat hepatitis and has been used previously to manage
SARS and MERS patients. An open-label, randomised controlled trial currently underway in
China included three regimens with the following
RBV (intravenous loading dose of 2 g, followed
by oral doses of 400–600 mg every 8 h depending on the patient’s weight, for 14 days);
LPV/r (oral, 400 mg/100 mg per dose, twice a
day, for 14 days);
IFN-α-1b (atomizing inhalation, 5 million U
or 50 μg per dose, twice a day, for 14 days).
And comparing the effectiveness of:
RBV plus IFN-α1b (arm A);
LPV/r plus IFN-α1b (arm B); and
RBV plus LPV/r plus IFN-α1b (arm C)
for the treatment of COVID-19.
Adverse effects46. Pancytopenia and bone marrow suppression have been reported with RBV.
No effect on QTc prolongation has been observed.
There are several serious adverse reactions associated with the combination therapy of RBV with
(peg)IFN-α . These include:
- Severe psychiatric and central nervous system effects (such as depression, suicidal
ideation, attempted suicide and aggressive
behaviour, etc.);
- Severe ocular disorders;
- Dental and periodontal disorders.
Drug interactions. RBV has two pathways of
metabolism: a reversible phosphorylation pathway
and a degradative pathway. Both RBV and metabolites are excreted renally. Results of in vitro studies indicated no CYP 450 enzyme-mediated
metabolism of RBV. RBV does not inhibit CYP
450 enzymes and there is no evidence from toxicity studies that it induces liver enzymes, therefore
potential for P450-based interactions is minimal.9
Information on drug interactions with RBV is limited. The Drugbank database lists potential pharmacokinetic drug interactions leading to increased
RBV levels with the following psychotropic agents:
clozapine, haloperidol, amitriptyline, duloxetine,
imipramine, phenelzine, venlafaxine, midazolam,
lamotrigine and pregabalin. It is not clear whether
these are actual reports of interactions or theoretical considerations, and the mechanisms are not
clear. Similarly, Drugbank also notes that RBV
may lead to increased levels of the following
psychotropic agents: paliperidone, quetiapine,
bupropion, clomipramine, desipramine, vortioxetine, clonazepam, diazepam, oxazepam, carbamazepine and lithium.
Therapeutic Advances in Psychopharmacology 10
Pharmacodynamic interactions with psychotropics
include infections and neutropenia, which have
both been reported with RBV use – a significant
risk for patients infected with COVID-19, particularly if also taking clozapine or carbamazepine, also
known to cause neutropenia. In addition, combination therapy of RBV with (peg)IFN-α has been
associated with severe psychiatric effects, another
serious concern if used in psychiatric patients.
Tocilizumab (TCZ) is an interleukin (IL)-6
receptor inhibiting monoclonal antibody that is
currently approved for rheumatological conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis and cytokine
release syndrome. TCZ is being trialled in patients
with severe COVID-19 to see whether it is effective in reducing the virus-induced cytokine storm,
thereby potentially reducing complications.47
However, the decision to suppress the immune
system of a critically unwell patient with COVID19 is a difficult one; the beneficial anti-inflammatory effects of TCZ (or any other anti-inflammatory
drug) must be weighed against the possibly detrimental effects of impairment of immunity.48
Patients with COVID-19 experience an elevation
of IL-6. However, since co-medication will not
have been adjusted to the acute inflammatory
COVID-19 state, and since treatment with TCZ
would have been initiated very rapidly (and only
up to two doses given), no prior adjustment of
CYP substrates is needed. But the effect of acute
COVID-19 infection on drugs with narrow therapeutic index is unclear.9 TCZ may decrease blood
levels of carbamazepine, which may require dose
Caution is required when co-administering with
myelotoxic drugs such as clozapine or carbamazepine due to the potential additive haematological
toxicity. No clinically significant effect on QT
prolongation was observed in healthy subjects.9
Other drugs
Intravenous immunoglobulin is being trialled in
some patients with COVID-19; however, there
are no data to support this. Angiotensin-II receptor antagonists such as losartan are being investigated as a potential treatment because it is thought
that the angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ACE2)
receptor is the main binding site for the virus.35,36
Reported dosage has been:
The initial dose should be 4–8 mg/kg, with
the recommended dosage being 400 mg;
Dilute with 0.9% saline to 100 ml and
infuse over the course of more than 1 h;
Repeat once after 12 h (same dosage) if the
response to the first dose was poor, maximum two cumulative doses;
Single maximum dose is 800 mg.
Drug interactions. TCZ has no direct inhibitory or inducing effects on CYP enzymes per se.
However, it reverses IL-6 induced suppression
of cytochromes (elevation of IL-6 during
inflammation has been shown to inhibit CYP
3A4, CYP2C19, CUP2C9 and CYP1A2 activity, resulting in higher drug exposure of substrate drugs), which, prior to treatment with
TCZ, has been adjusted to the metabolism of
individuals. When treatment with TCZ is
started, cytochrome activity normalises, thus
leading to reduced exposure of drugs, which,
prior to treatment, had been adjusted to the
metabolism of individuals with the rheumatic
disease that it is usually used for.9
In addition, researchers at the Murdoch
set to conduct a randomised, multi-centre clinical trial to test the use of tuberculosis vaccine
BCG against Covid-19. The BRACE trial is
intended for healthcare workers. It is based on
previous study findings that BCG decreases the
level of virus in patients infected by viruses similar to SARS-CoV-2.49 BCG vaccine’s heterologous beneficial effect against non-tuberculosis
infections is well known. The vaccine works on
the innate immune system and produces a
memory like response termed ‘trained immunity’ that helps in faster recognition, triggering
a quicker inflammatory response. Recent studies have also suggested that it has the potential
to protect against experimental infection with
yellow fever vaccine strain and to enhance
immune responses to other vaccines in general
including influenza vaccination.50
We urge clinicians to exercise significant caution
in the use of any of the previously mentioned
medications even on a compassionate-use basis
in the absence of adequately powered and/or
D Bishara, C Kalafatis et al.
trials for the treatment of COVID-19 patients.
An even higher threshold of vigilance should be
maintained for patients with pre-existing conditions and older adults due to added toxicity and
many psychotropic agents can interact with
agents used in COVID-19, leading to serious
adverse effects including QTc prolongation thus
increasing the risk of torsades de pointes and
bone marrow suppression. Identifying and
avoiding these interactions can be vital to
improving survival in COVID-19 patients.
Conflict of interest statement
Delia Bishara
David Taylor
1. Kalil AC. Treating COVID-19-off-label drug
use, compassionate use, and randomized
2. Sayburn A. Covid-19: trials of four potential
treatments to generate “robust data” of what
works. BMJ 2020; 368: m1206.
3. Recovery: Randomised Evaluation of COVID19 Therapy. This nation clinical trials aims to
identify treatments that may be beneficial for
4. Medicines Complete. Stockley’s interactions checker,
stockleys-interactions-checker/ (accessed 06 May
5. HIV Drug Interactions. Interaction
10. Medicines.org.uk. Azithromycin 250mg capsules.
PROPS (accessed 02 April 2020).
prevention of coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
12. Expert consensus on chloroquine phosphate for
the treatment of novel coronavirus pneumonia.
Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi 2020; 43:
13. Gautret P, Lagier JC, Parola P, et al.
Hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin as a
treatment of COVID-19: results of an open-label
non-randomized clinical trial. Int J Antimicrob
14. Molina JM, Delaugerre C, Goff JL, et al.
No evidence of rapid antiviral clearance
or clinical benefit with the combination of
hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin in patients
with severe COVID-19 Infection, Med Mal
15. Chen J, Liu D, Liu L, et al, A pilot study of
hydroxychloroquine in treatment of patients with
common coronavirus disease-19 (COVID-19).
J Zhejiang Univ 2020; 49: 215–219.
16. Chen Z, Hu J, Zhang Z, et al. Efficacy of
hydroxychloroquine in patients with COVID-19:
results of a randomized clinical trial. medRxiv
17. Chorin E, Dai M, Shulman E, et al. The QT
interval in patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection
treated with hydroxychloroquine/azithromycin.
Therapeutic Advances in Psychopharmacology 10
18. BMJ. Rapid response: use of hydroxychloroquine
19. Schrezenmeier E and Dorner T. Mechanisms of
action of hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine:
implications for rheumatology. Nat Rev
20. Zhou D, Dai SM and Tong Q. COVID-19:
a recommendation to examine the effect of
hydroxychloroquine in preventing infection and
21. U.S. Food & Drug Administration.
Hydrochloroquine or chloroquine for
COVID-19: drug safety communication
– FDA cautions against use outside of the
hospital setting or a clinical trial due to
hydroxychloroquine-or-chloroquine-covid-19drug-safety-communication-fda-cautions-againstuse (accessed 02 May 2020).
22. Liu X, Li Z, Liu Z, et al. Potential therapeutic
effects of dipyridamole in the severely ill patients
product/3557/smpc (accessed 05 May 2020).
dipyridamole.html (accessed 05 May 2020).
31. Cai Q, Yang M, Liu D, et al. Experimental
treatment with favipiravir for COVID-19: an
open-label control study. Engineering (Beijing).
32. Young BE, Ong SWX, Kalimuddin S, et al.
Epidemiologic features and clinical course of
patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 in Singapore.
33. Cao B, Wang Y, Wen D, et al. A trial of
lopinavir–ritonavir in adults hospitalized with
34. Medicines.org.uk. Norvir 100mg film-coated
product/510/smpc (accessed 03 March 2020).
35. Rossignol JF. Nitazoxanide: a first-in-class broadspectrum antiviral agent. Antivir Res 2014; 110:
36. Padmanabhan S. Potential dual therapeutic
approach against SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 with
Nitazoxanide and Hydroxychloroquine. 2020.
37. Yao X, Ye F, Zhang M, et al. In vitro
antiviral activity and projection of optimized
dosing design of hydroxychloroquine for the
treatment of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Clin Infect Dis.
38. Wang M, Cao R, Zhang L, et al. Remdesivir
and chloroquine effectively inhibit the recently
emerged novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in vitro.
Cell Res 2020; 30: 269–271.
PROPS (accessed 05 May 2020).
city=&dist=&Search=Search (accessed 27 March
27. Borrell B. New York clinical trial quietly tests
heartburn remedy against coronavirus. Science,
29. Taylor D, Barnes TRE and Young AH. The
Maudsley prescribing guidelines in psychiatry. 13th
ed. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2018.
40. BMJ Best Practice. Coronavirus disease 2019
41. Grein J, Norio Ohmagari N, Shin D, et al.
Compassionate use of remdesivir for patients
D Bishara, C Kalafatis et al.
alphain in patients with mild to moderate novel
coronavirus pneumonia. Chin Med J (Engl) 2020;
42. Gilead sciences initiates two phase 3 studies
of investigational antiviral remdesivir for the
gilead-sciences-initiates-two-phase-3-studiesof-investigational-antiviral-remdesivir-for-thetreatment-of-covid-19 (accessed 27 March 2020).
46. Medicines.org.uk. Ribavirin 200mg film-coated
product/7108/smpc. (accessed 28 March 2020).
news-releases/nih-clinical-trial-remdesivir-treatcovid-19-begins (accessed 27 March 2020).
44. MedicineNet. Remdesivir (RDV): experimental
remdesivir_rdv (accessed 27 March 2020).
48. Ritchie AI and Singanayagam A. Immuno­
suppression for hyperinflammation in COVID-19:
a double-edged sword? Lancet 2020; 395: 1111.
45. Zeng YM, Xu XL, He XQ, et al. Comparative
effectiveness and safety of ribavirin plus interferonalpha, lopinavir/ritonavir plus interferon-alpha and
ribavirin plus lopinavir/ritonavir plus interferon-
healthcare workers against COVID-19 (BRACE),
50. Mahase E. Covid-19: what treatments are being
investigated? BMJ 2020; 368: m1252.
