RESEARCH ARTICLE
Open Access
Iron metabolism and lymphocyte
characterisation during Covid-19 infection
in ICU patients: an observational cohort
Giuliano Bolondi1* , Emanuele Russo1, Emiliano Gamberini1, Alessandro Circelli1, Manlio Cosimo Claudio Meca1,
Etrusca Brogi1, Lorenzo Viola1, Luca Bissoni1, Venerino Poletti2,3 and Vanni Agnoletti1
Background: Iron metabolism and immune response to SARS-CoV-2 have not been described yet in intensive care
patients, although they are likely involved in Covid-19 pathogenesis.
Methods: We performed an observational study during the peak of pandemic in our intensive care unit, dosing Ddimer, C-reactive protein, troponin T, lactate dehydrogenase, ferritin, serum iron, transferrin, transferrin saturation,
transferrin soluble receptor, lymphocyte count and NK, CD3, CD4, CD8 and B subgroups of 31 patients during the
first 2 weeks of their ICU stay. Correlation with mortality and severity at the time of admission was tested with the
Spearman coefficient and Mann–Whitney test. Trends over time were tested with the Kruskal–Wallis analysis.
Results: Lymphopenia is severe and constant, with a nadir on day 2 of ICU stay (median 0.555 109/L; interquartile
range (IQR) 0.450 109/L); all lymphocytic subgroups are dramatically reduced in critically ill patients, while CD4/CD8
ratio remains normal. Neither ferritin nor lymphocyte count follows significant trends in ICU patients. Transferrin
saturation is extremely reduced at ICU admission (median 9%; IQR 7%), then significantly increases at days 3 to 6
(median 33%, IQR 26.5%, p value 0.026). The same trend is observed with serum iron levels (median 25.5 μg/L, IQR
69 μg/L at admission; median 73 μg/L, IQR 56 μg/L on days 3 to 6) without reaching statistical significance.
Hyperferritinemia is constant during intensive care stay: however, its dosage might be helpful in individuating
patients developing haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. D-dimer is elevated and progressively increases from
admission (median 1319 μg/L; IQR 1285 μg/L) to days 3 to 6 (median 6820 μg/L; IQR 6619 μg/L), despite not
reaching significant results. We describe trends of all the abovementioned parameters during ICU stay.
Conclusions: The description of iron metabolism and lymphocyte count in Covid-19 patients admitted to the
intensive care unit provided with this paper might allow a wider understanding of SARS-CoV-2 pathophysiology.
Keywords: MeSH repository (3-10), Iron, COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, Coronavirus, Critical care, Lymphocytes,
Lymphopenia, Ferritins, Immunity, Coagulation
The work was conducted in the Anesthesia and Intensive Care Unit of the
Bufalini Hospital in Cesena (Italy).
Anesthesia and Intensive Care Unit, AUSL Romagna – Bufalini Hospital, viale
Ghirotti 286, 47521 Cesena, FC, Italy
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
Covid-19 has been declared a pandemic by World
Health Organization (WHO) on the 11th of March. The
high contagiousness and the previously unknown clinical
features of this new viral infection put under pressure
healthcare systems and clinicians worldwide.
Early reports from the Chinese province of Hubei described some predictive biomarkers for the clinical outcome of hospitalised patients, namely lymphopenia and
the elevation of D-dimer, ferritin, interleukin 6 (IL-6),
troponin and myoglobin, C-reactive protein (CRP) and
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) [1, 2]. LDH is a marker of
parenchymal lung damage, and troponin and myoglobin
are markers of myocardial and muscular involvement,
while the remaining molecules belong to the group of
positive acute-phase proteins (APP).
Ferritin is a crucial component of iron metabolism,
one of the most ancestral systems of host protection
from pathogen infections [3]. Iron is a micronutrient necessary for both energy production at a mitochondrial
level and nucleic acid replication at cytoplasmic and nuclear level. For its scarcity in the human body and the
fundamental processes in which it is involved, pathogens
(bacterial, viral or fungal) compete with the host for iron
availability in order to guarantee their own replication.
When innate immunity is activated and cytokine cascades start, IL-1 and IL-6 stimulate hepcidin expression
in the liver, reducing iron bioavailability by decreasing
its gut absorption and hiding it into ferritin, a shell-like
molecule deposited in macrophages. These mechanisms
Lymphopenia and specific T cell lineage affection
are characteristic features of Covid-19 and have been
correlated with poorer prognosis [9–11]. In previous
coronavirus outbreaks, such as SARS, the peak of
viral load occurred 7 days after symptoms development, followed by elevation in IL-6 and IL-8, nadir
lymphocyte count and successive pulmonary infiltrates. This description suggests that clinical symptoms might be mediated by the immune system
deregulation rather than direct viral damage [12]. The
distribution of different subtypes of T cells in peripheral blood of symptomatic critical and non-critical
Covid-19 patients has been described [13–16].
With this observational study, we aim to provide a detailed description of iron metabolism and lymphocyte
subpopulations in ICU Covid-19 population. It can lead
to a better understanding of the underlying physiopathology of this unknown disease, foreseeing some possible alternative therapeutic targets.
Reported cases
In-hospital pre-ICU LOS (days)
ICU LOS
CT scan (L:H)
Intubated patients (%)
Pro-coagulative disorders (%)
Admitted from other centres (%)
4 men still admitted in our ICU
BMI body mass index, CRRT continuous renal-replacement therapy, CT scan computed tomography (only those with both images and radiologic report
available—H stays for high-elastance pattern and L stays for low-elastance pattern), ICU intensive care unit, IQR interquartile range, LOS length of stay, Mortality 21
men over 25 enrolled because 4 are still in our ICU, PFmed means PaO2/FiO2 ratio during the first 24 h of ICU stay, PLR platelet-to-lymphocyte ratio on the day of
ICU admission, Pnx pneumothorax, Pro-coagulative disorders deep-vein thrombosis, ischaemic stroke or massive pulmonary embolism, VAP
ventilator-acquired pneumonia
Study population
This is a single-centre retrospective observational cohort
study. The first COVID-19-positive patient in our ICU
has been admitted on the 5th of March 2020. Data collection goes from the 6th of March to the 6th of April 2020,
following the local peak of epidemic. A protocol was
established to test predictive biomarkers. On the day of
ICU admission and then twice-a-week (on Monday and
Thursday), every ICU patient was tested for ferritin, serum
iron, transferrin and transferrin saturation (TfSat), soluble
receptor of transferrin, CRP, D-dimer, LDH, troponin,
lymphocyte count and characterisation of T cells (CD3,
CD4 and CD8), B cells and NK cells. Then, data were
divided in the following sub-categories: TI1-2 (first dosage
made on ICU admission), TI3-6 (dosage between days 3
and 6 of ICU stay), TI 7-10 and TI 11-14. We observed
their trends during the first 2 weeks of ICU stay. Due to
laboratory restrictions, just 9 patients were tested for
interleukin-6 (IL6) only on the day of admission [17].
Inclusion criteria
Every SARS-CoV-2-positive patient (oropharyngeal swab
or bronchoalveolar lavage sample, PCR test) admitted to
our ICU was automatically enrolled in the study. Overall,
31 patients entered in the final data analysis fulfilling inclusion criteria. Importantly, we count ICU length of
stay (LOS) from the day of admission in the first ICU:
Fig. 1 Iron parameters. Distribution over time of the tested iron parameters with their units of measure. Box plots indicate median with
interquartile range, and dots indicate outliers. Groups specify the timing by which the dosage was effectuated form the moment of ICU
admission, and round brackets in the lower line indicate the number of patients tested for each group. In e, asterisk indicates significant
difference (p value > 0.05)
this means that dosages of patients transferred to our
unit from other ICUs do not start from day 1.
Data collection ended with the following criteria
Data collection was stopped after day 18 of ICU stay;
iron-related data analysis was stopped or not taken
into account for the final analysis if bacterial infection
occurred, since we considered it a known confounding factor for inflammatory response; patients were
discharged from our analysis on the date of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) start (3 patients) or death.
Fig. 2 Lymphocytes count. Distribution over time of lymphocytes and their tested subgroups, with their units of measure. Box plots indicate
median with interquartile range, and dots indicate outliers. Groups specify the timing by which the dosage was effectuated form the moment of
over time more readable
Serum iron (μg/L)
Transferrin Saturation (%)
Transferrin Receptor (mg/L)
Data are all expressed as median, interquartile range between brackets and number of measured cases in the second line
Exclusion criteria
All patients admitted for strict clinical monitoring and
discharged within 48 h from ICU; all admitted patients
who tested negative for SARS-CoV-2; and no underage
patients were included. Overall, 6 patients were initially
tested but then excluded from the final analysis for the
abovementioned criteria.
The primary outcome was a descriptive analysis of iron
metabolism values and lymphocyte count in ICU patients. Then, as a secondary outcome, we tried to correlate iron metabolism parameters and lymphocyte count
with mortality or severity at the moment of ICU admission. Severity at the moment of ICU admission was
quantified with two parameters: mean PaO2/FiO2 ratio
Measurement technology
Iron parameters were tested with Cobas analyser systems
(RocheⓇ), while lymphocyte subpopulations with the
Navios EX flow cytometer (Beckman CoultrerⓇ).
Statistical analysis
The formula used to estimate TfSat (TfSat = serum
iron/(transferrin × 1.42) × 100) is not reliable for ferritin
values above 1200 μg/L: in this case, those values were
not included in final analysis. Statistical analysis was performed using the software IBM SPSS 22.0. Data are reported as mean with standard deviation (std. dev.),
median with interquartile range (IQR), number and percentage, depending on underlying distribution. Student’s
t test, Mann–Whitney, Kruskal–Wallis, Spearman correlation and χ2 tests were used for statistical analysis.
particularly elevated because in our Hospital are present
sub-intensive care units and because ICU stay lower
than 48 h (only for strict monitoring purposes) was an
exclusion criteria. It is therefore likely the analysis accounts for a population of severely affected patients. CT
scan patterns of low (L) or high (H) elastance refer to
the phenotypes proposed by Gattinoni et al. [20]. Due to
the exiguity of our sample and the different focus of our
A significant increase of TfSat levels (%) occurs between the first 48 h of ICU stay and days 3 to 6 (Mann–
Whitney, p value = 0.026, Fig. 1). No other significant
trends and modifications of iron parameters and
lymphocyte subpopulations were found during ICU stay.
Lymphocytes and their subpopulations do not show significant trends of modification either.
Trends and modifications of iron parameters are reported
in Fig. 1, while trends and modifications of lymphocytes
count and lymphocytic subgroups are reported in Fig. 2.
Looking to secondary outcomes, neither iron parameters nor lymphocyte count correlate with mortality,
The already described survival predictors in general
hospital population (LDH, troponin, CRP and D-dimer)
Data are all expressed as median, interquartile range between brackets and
number of measured cases in the second line
Data are all expressed as median, interquartile range between brackets and number of measured cases in the second line
are not significantly associated with outcome, PLR or
D-dimer shows a non-significant tendency to increase
after ICU admission (Kruskal–Wallis, p value = 0.108,
Fig. 3). IL6 elevation is lower than reported by other
studies on critically ill Covid-19 patients [21]. We found
a debile correlation between IL6 levels and lymphocyte
count on the day of ICU admission (8 cases, Spearman
rho 0.714, p value = 0.047), but the analysis is limited by
the low amount of cases.
Cytokines release hyper-expresses hepcidin, leading to
ferroportin internalisation and reduced iron absorption
and availability in body fluids [22, 23]. Serum iron and
TfSat are known to decrease early after infections, inhibiting iron availability to the pathogen, but then return
to almost-normal values within 7–10 days [24, 25]. The
role of dysregulated iron response in Covid-19 has been
Serum iron does not show significant modifications,
but it follows the same trend of TfSat being part of the
formula to calculate it. They both remain lower than the
normal reference values during the whole infection. It is
difficult to hypothesise the reason of their trend without
proper laboratory research: the dramatic low levels at
ICU admission might be expected, but the following increase during an acute phase of inflammatory response
seems counter-intuitive. The described patients arrived
in our ICU after a median of 7 to 9 days from symptoms
onset: the physiologic progressive restoration of normal
TfSat after 1 week of infection and the dysregulated
cytokine response might contribute to TfSat elevation.
Also, it has been described that acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS) causes reduced serum iron levels [27]:
intubated Covid-19 patients suffer of this syndrome,
while protective ventilation might theoretically restore
normal iron levels.
Ferritin is a very early and non-specific indicator of inflammation. It resulted to be the first severely elevated
biomarker together with lymphopenia [1]: thus, its early
dosage in at-home symptomatic patients might be extremely useful in individuating those who can benefit of
early hospital admission. After its initial rise, ferritin can
take longer than a month to normalise after an infection
[24]. Thus, it remains elevated during ICU stay of
Covid-19 patients. Despite being apparently futile, its
dosage constitutes the key element to suspect secondary
haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (sHLH). sHLH is
a frequently misdiagnosed syndrome related to viral infections and thus of primary importance in this Covid19 pandemic. Overall, despite unable of a more detailed
description, we demonstrate how iron metabolism is deranged in severe forms of Covid-19.
Lymphocytes are constantly reduced in ICU Covid-19
patients with respect to reference values. All the subsets
are also dramatically reduced, more than reported by
other recent publications referring to non-ICU populations [9, 28]. We observe a conserved CD4/CD8 ratio.
The nadir of lymphopenia is on day 2 of ICU stay; a progressive tendency towards normalisation is more evident
in patients experiencing positive outcome and ICU discharge. Similar timing of lymphocyte modifications was
observed during severe acute respiratory disease (SARS)
outbreak, despite with less dramatic reduction [29, 30].
Troponin T (ng/L)
Fig. 3 D-dimer levels. D-dimer levels over time from the moment of ICU admission. It is observable a non-significant trend towards increase after
the first 48 h. It might be relevant to explain the increased tendency to hypercoagulability of Covid-19 patients. Box plots indicate median with
interquartile range, and dots indicate outliers. Groups specify the timing by which the dosage was effectuated form the moment of
ICU admission
Being referred to critically ill patients, this more severe
reduction of all lymphocyte subgroups might be an indicator of severity. To date, no other publications are
available about ICU populations on lymphocytes
Being such a specific subset of critically ill patients, many
significant differences were not observable between survivors and non. These data might be relevant to researchers
for a better understanding of the altered immunologic response in severely affected patients and to ICU clinicians.
The study is affected by some limitations. The sanitary
emergency and the previously unknown characteristics of
this disease led to many difficulties. During the initial
phase, it has been difficult to create an effective protocol
shared between the operators and some data have been
missed. We have frequently acted as a backup hospital to
relieve other overloaded ICUs nearby: this means that, for
a part of the reported cases, the first few days of ICU stay
occurred in a different unit and the dosage of relevant
markers was missed during that initial phase. Being a
monocentric study conceived during an emergency phase,
the sample size is limited and cannot be increased: this led
to the impossibility to detect and describe some more subtle physiologic processes. Finally, slightly different therapeutic approaches have been applied to patients following
ongoing findings and different complications (ventilatoracquired pneumonia, pro-coagulative states, renal and
hepatic insufficiency) have affected patients’ evolution: it is
not possible to quantify how these differences affected
iron metabolism and lymphocyte count.
We describe iron metabolism, lymphocyte subgroups
count and other biomarkers in critically ill Covid-19
patients. This might be relevant for clinicians dealing
with critical patients and provide further hints about the
pathophysiology of this disease.
Iron metabolism has been repeatedly proposed as a
potential therapeutic target during infections [31, 32].
Pharmacologic advances have made available safer iron
chelators [33]. This testifies the relevance of the topics
investigated and how they might contribute to the development of novel therapeutic strategies against Covid-19.
APP: Acute phase-proteins; ARDS: Acute respiratory distress syndrome;
CRP: C-reactive protein; CRRT: Continuous renal replacement therapy;
ECMO: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; HLH: Haemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis; IL-6: Interleukin 6; IQR: Interquartile range; LDH: Lactate
dehydrogenase; LOS: Length of stay; MOF: Multiple organ failure;
PCR: Polymerase chain reaction; PFmed: Mean PaO2/FiO2 ratio during the
first 24 h of ICU admission; PLR: Platelet-to-lymphocyte ratio on the day of
ICU admission; PPE: Personal protective equipment; SARS: Severe acute
respiratory syndrome; SARS-CoV-2: SARS coronavirus type 2; TfSat: Transferrin
saturation (%); VAP: Ventilator-acquired pneumonia; WHO: World Health
investigation protocol in such a difficult time; we also thank Prof. Drakesmith
incitation in continuing our data collection and Prof. Antonio Lucariello
(Università degli Studi di Napoli, Federico II) for his contribution to the
understanding of iron metabolism.
BG conceived the study project, wrote the paper and collected scientific
analysis and contributed to the drafting; GE, CA, MMCC, BE, VL and BL
contributed to the data collection, database curation and drafting; PV and
Availability of data and materials
The datasets used and analysed during the current study are available from
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Protocol IR-COV, version 21st of April 2020, approved by the Romagna Ethical
Consent for publication
All clinical data are completely anonymised; discharged patients are being
telephonically contacted to get informed consent.
Competing interests
Anesthesia and Intensive Care Unit, AUSL Romagna – Bufalini Hospital, viale
Ghirotti 286, 47521 Cesena, FC, Italy. 2Department of Respiratory Diseases &
Respiratory Diseases, AUSL Romagna - Morgagni Hospital, Forlì, Italy.
1. Zhou F, Yu T, Du R, Fan G, Liu Y, Liu Z, et al. Clinical course and risk factors
for mortality of adult inpatients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a
retrospective cohort study. Lancet. 2020;6736:1–9.
2. Ruan Q, Yang K, Wang W, Jiang L, Song J. Clinical predictors of mortality
due to COVID - 19 based on an analysis of data of 150 patients from
3. Pietrangelo A. Pathogens, metabolic adaptation, and human diseases - an
iron-thrifty genetic model. Gastroenterology. 2015;149:834.
4. Cassat JE, Skaar EP. Iron in infection and immunity. Cell Host Microbe. 2013;
5. Drakesmith H, Prentice A. Viral infection and iron metabolism. Nat Rev
6. Drakesmith H, Prentice AM. Hepcidin and the iron-infection axis. Science.
7. Litton E, Lim J. Iron metabolism: an emerging therapeutic target in critical
illness. Crit Care Critical Care. 2019;23:1–8.
8. Ganz T. Anemia of inflammation. N Engl J Med. 2019;381:1148–57.
9. Qin C, Zhou L, Hu Z, Zhang S, Yang S, Tao Y, et al. Dysregulation of
immune response in patients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China Chuan. Clin
10. Huang I, Pranata R. Lymphopenia in severe coronavirus disease-2019
11. Velavan TP, Meyer CG. Mild versus severe COVID-19: laboratory markers. Int J
Infect Dis. 2020;95:304–7.
12. Wang W, Chen S, I-Jun L, Kao C, Chen H, Chiang B, et al. Temporal
relationship of viral load, ribavirin, interleukin (IL)–6, IL-8, and clinical
progression in patients with severe acute respiratory syndrome. Clin Infect
13. Cossarizza A, De Biasi S, Guaraldi G, Girardis M, Mussini C. Modena Covid-19
Working Group (MoCo19). SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19:
cytometry and the new challenge for global health. Cytometry A. 2020;97:
14. Liu R, Wang Y, Li J, Han H, Xia Z, Liu F, et al. Decreased T cell populations
contribute to the increased severity of COVID-19. Clin Chim Acta. 2020;508:
15. Wan S, Yi Q, Fan S, Lv J, Zhang X, Guo L, et al. Relationships among
lymphocyte subsets, cytokines, and the pulmonary inflammation index in
coronavirus (COVID-19) infected patients. Br J Haematol. 2020;189:428–37.
16. Wang F, Nie J, Wang H, Zhao Q, Xiong Y, Deng L, et al. Characteristics of
peripheral lymphocyte subset alteration in COVID-19 pneumonia. J Infect
17. Aziz M, Fatima R, Assaly R. Elevated interleukin-6 and severe COVID-19: a
18. Ranieri VM, Rubenfeld GD, Thompson BT, Ferguson ND, Caldwell E, Fan E,
et al. Acute respiratory distress syndrome: The Berlin definition. JAMA. 2012;
19. Qu R, Ling Y, Zhang Y, Wei L, Chen X, Li X, et al. Platelet-to-lymphocyte
ratio is associated with prognosis in patients with coronavirus disease-19.
20. Gattinoni L, Chiumello D, Caironi P, Busana M, Romitti F, Brazzi L, et al.
COVID-19 pneumonia: different respiratory treatment for different
21. Tu W-J, Cao J, Yu L, Hu X, Liu Q. Clinicolaboratory study of 25 fatal cases of
22. Nemeth E, Tuttle MS, Powelson J, Vaughn MD, Donovan A, Ward DMV, et al.
Hepcidin regulates cellular iron efflux by binding to ferroportin and
inducing its internalization. Science. 2004;306:2090–3.
23. Sabelli M, Montosi G, Garuti C, Caleffi A, Oliveto S, Biffo S, et al. Human
macrophage ferroportin biology and the basis for the ferroportin disease.
24. Eskeland B, Baerheim A, Ulvik R, Hunskaar S. Influence of mild infections on
iron status parameters in women of reproductive age. Scand J Prim Health
25. Punnonen K, Irjala K, Rajamäki A. Serum transferrin receptor and its ratio to
serum ferritin in the diagnosis of iron deficiency. Blood. 1997;89:1052–7.
26. Edeas M, Saleh J, Peyssonnaux C. Iron: innocent bystander or vicious culprit
in COVID-19 pathogenesis? Int J Infect Dis. Int J Infect Dis; 2020; Available
27. Stites SW, Nelson ME, Wesselius LJ. Transferrin concentrations in serum and
lower respiratory tract fluid of mechanically ventilated patients with COPD
or ARDS. Chest. 1995;107:1681–5.
29. He Z, Zhao C, Dong Q, Zhuang H, Song S, Peng G, et al. Effects of severe
acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus infection on peripheral
blood lymphocytes and their subsets. Int J Infect Dis. 2005;9:323–30.
30. Wong RSM, Wu A, To KF, Lee N, Lam CWK, Wong CK, et al. Haematological
manifestations in patients with severe acute respiratory syndrome:
Retrospective analysis. Br Med J. 2003;326:1358–62.
31. Dalamaga M, Karampela I, Mantzoros CS. Commentary: Could iron chelators
prove to be useful as an adjunct to COVID-19 treatment regimens?
32. Liu W, Zhang S, Nekhai S, Liu S. Depriving iron supply to the virus
represents a promising adjuvant therapeutic against viral survival. Curr. Clin.
33. Bernhardt PV. Coordination chemistry and biology of chelators for the
treatment of iron overload disorders. Dalton Trans. 2007;30:3214–20.
