Xi et al. Critical Care
Open Access
Rapid establishment of an ICU using
anesthesia ventilators during COVID-19
pandemic: lessons learned
Amanda S. Xi1, Marvin G. Chang2*
and Edward A. Bittner1
Keywords: Ventilator shortage, Anesthesia ventilators, Ventilator deployment, ICU shortage, COVID-19, Coronavirus
we thought it might be helpful to share our challenging experience with the deployment of anesthesia ventilators in our
ICU when faced with a recent ventilator shortage at our
In April 2020, Massachusetts General Hospital saw a significant surge in demand for ICU beds and ventilators due to
an influx of COVID-19 patients. We converted our postanesthesia care units (PACUs) to ICUs and utilized
anesthesia ventilators to care for more than 40 COVID-19
patients. While this experience posed challenges, important
lessons were learned.
These PACUs turned ICUs required dedicated anesthesia
providers to serve as respiratory therapists to manage and
troubleshoot the anesthesia ventilators which are functionally
different from standard ICU ventilators. Due to the circle
system design of anesthesia ventilators and a lack of circuit
water traps, higher gas flow rates and frequent circuit
changes were required thereby increasing providers’ risk of
exposure. Lack of humidification in the circuit resulted in
thicker airway secretions and airway obstruction. The heat
and moisture exchanger filters which are utilized on
anesthesia ventilators clogged easily leading to frequent high
Division of Cardiac Anesthesia and Critical Care, Department of Anesthesia,
Critical Care and Pain Medicine, The Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
airway pressure alarms. Special attention to the position of
the side-stream gas analyzer was also required when the patient was in the prone position because condensation quickly
accumulated in the water trap when the circuit connection
was in the dependent position. In addition, safe deployment
of anesthesia ventilators required integration with the
centralized alarm system.
The anesthesia ventilators utilized in our ICUs did not
have a volume assist-control ventilation mode which led to
dyssynchrony, barotrauma, desaturation, auto positive endexpiratory pressure (auto-PEEP), and hemodynamic instability when volume control was employed without the patient
paralyzed. Thus, pressure support (PS) mode became the primary mode of ventilation utilized. An important requirement
for use of the PS mode was setting a backup respiratory rate
to avoid complications such as hypoventilation when sedatives and/or paralysis were administered. Avoiding adverse
events from untimely response to alarms required anesthesia
providers to maintain vigilance in the setting of increased
alarm fatigue; therefore, a greater than expected staffing
model was required to maintain patient safety.
Despite these challenges, the use of anesthesia ventilators
provided a unique opportunity to use volatile anesthetics,
which have been associated with faster extubation times and
opioid-sparing effects [2].
While anesthesia ventilators expanded our capacity,
we rapidly learned their limitations and potential benefits
for long-term use.
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
Xi et al. Critical Care
Goh KJ, Wong J, Tien JC, Ng SY, Duu Wen S, Phua GC, Leong CK
We commend Xi et al. for their resilience and
innovation in managing the ventilator shortage in their
institution and agree with many of the points made. The
COVID-19 pandemic has made it necessary for many physicians to implement unconventional strategies to increase
access to intensive care, including the use of a single
ventilator to ventilate multiple patients [3].
Indeed, there are many challenges associated with the
use of anesthetic machines as ventilators. The problems
with the circle circuit, side-stream gas analyzer, and need
for more frequent changes of the heat and moisture exchanger filters are unique to anesthetic machines. The
manpower requirement for a dedicated anesthesiologist to
run the machine was mitigated by the reduction in elective surgical workload during the pandemic.
Fortunately, many anesthetic machines are also able to
deliver more advanced modes of ventilation, including
volume assist-control ventilation, pressure-regulated volume control, and synchronized intermittent mandatory
ventilation, reducing the risk of dyssynchrony and barotrauma. The use of an anesthetic machine also facilitates
the use of inhalationals, which confers the advantage of
a reduction in dependence on intravenous infusions of
sedatives during a supply chain disruption [1].
Apart from ventilation, other challenges exist when converting post-anesthetic care units into intensive care units.
Central monitoring may not be possible, and a larger
number of nursing or medical staff will therefore be required to watch for any clinical changes or observe for
alarms. Due to existing infrastructural limitations, restrictions may exist with other modes of organ support. For instance, absence of taps and drainage may preclude the use
of intermittent haemodialysis. Intensive care physicians
may have to triage patients carefully and assign an appropriate intensive care unit according to the level of organ
support that can be safely delivered [4].
Finally, infection prevention measures may be compromised when the patients are cohorted in the postanesthetic care unit rather than cared for in single
rooms. This is an important consideration especially if
emergency surgery still needs to take place within the
same operating theater complex [5].
Unique challenges exist at each institution depending
on its clinical needs and available resources. The best
and safest strategy is the one tailored to the individual
hospital and current situation.
Availability of data and materials
Not applicable
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable
Consent for publication
Not applicable
Competing interests
ASX reports none. MGC reports none. EAB reports none.
Division of Critical Care, Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain
Boston, MA, USA. 2Division of Cardiac Anesthesia and Critical Care,
Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain Medicine, The
1. Goh KJ, Wong J, Tien JC, Ng SY, Duu Wen S, Phua GC, Leong CK. Preparing
your intensive care unit for the COVID-19 pandemic: practical
2. Jerath A, Parotto M, Wasowicz M, Ferguson ND. Volatile anesthetics. Is a
new player emerging in critical care sedation? Am J Respir Crit Care Med.
3. American Society of Anesthesiologists. Joint statement on multiple patients
[ACCESSED DATEAccessed 1 June 2020].
4. Wong J, Ng SY, Goh MH, Tan KH, Chai HZ, Goh KJ, Soh CR. Anaesthesia and
intensive care medicine in a COVID-19 pandemic. Singapore Med J 2020.
of operating room outbreak response measures in a large tertiary hospital
in Singapore. Can J Anaesth. 2020;67:732–45.
