COPYRIGHT 2020 © BY THE ARCHIVES OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY
CURRENT CONCEPTS REVIEW
Prevention and Control of the New Coronavirus in
Ehsan Rafeemanesh, MD1; Fatemeh Ahmadi, MD1; Maryam Memarzadeh, MD1
Workplaces are susceptible places for exposure to the new coronavirus (Covid-19) infection due to gathering of many
people. Hence, different instructions have been promoted by international organizations regarding high-risk employees
the required strategies to prevent and control COVID-19 in the workplace. In conclusion, considering the fast spreading
and growing prevalence of the new corona virus disease in the world over, all managers, employers, and business
owners should receive the necessary information and training on prevention and control strategies based on scientific
guidelines and standards.
Level of evidence: III
Keywords: Coronavirus, COVID-19, Prevention and control, Workplace
n December 2019, a new type of severe pneumonia
was reported in Wuhan, China, which had a high
genetic affinity with SARS-CoV and now called
Corona virus 2019 disease (COVID-19) (1). Now
it is clear that person to person transmission via
respiratory droplets is the main transmission rout
of this virus. Recent reports suggested that infected
individuals may be contagious even when they are
asymptomatic (2-3). However, according to available
data, people with symptoms are more likely to spread
the virus. Moreover, it has been suggested that
COVID-19 patients may also spread the virus in the
convalescent period. Notably, whether patient that
have healed from this virus will become infected
again upon exposure is still unknown (4). However,
the World Health Organization (WHO) is constantly
monitoring the epidemiology of the outbreak to
increase its knowledge of the virus transmission
of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran
cycle and methods of protection and prevention of the
disease. Accurate medical information from infected
individuals is needed to determine the infectious
course of this new disease (5).
Workplaces are susceptible places for exposure to the
new coronavirus infection due to gathering of many
people. Hence, different guidelines have been promoted
by international organizations regarding high-risk
employees and the necessity of implementing health
policies to prevent exposure and infection control in the
Given the increasing prevalence of COVID-19, difficulties
in prompt case detection and the unknown mechanism of
transmission, several workers are at the risk of exposure
to this disease. Considering the importance of prevention
and infection control in the workplace, here we aimed
COVID-19 in the workplace.
Arch Bone Jt Surg. 2020; 8 (Supplement 1): 242-246. Doi: 10.22038/abjs.2020.47410.2323
THE ARCHIVES OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY. ABJS.MUMS.AC.IR
VOLUME 8. SUPPLEMENT 1. APRIL 2020
Occupations at the risk of exposure to COVID-19
Because of the wide and rapid spread of this new disease,
all jobs have a risk of encountering COVID-19, especially
those that involve direct contact with customers and
clients. However, some employees, such as health care
workers, people working at laboratories, tourism and
transport industry, hotel and restaurant staff, and waste
workers are at a higher risk due to direct exposure to
people and or workplace contamination. Preventive and
control measures to protect workers against coronavirus
and its exposure depend on the type of work performed
and the risk of exposure, including the potential to come
in contact with infected people and workplace pollution
(7). According to the Centers for Disease Control (CDC)
guidelines, occupations that are more exposed to the new
coronavirus include (8):
1. Health care workers (HCWs)
2. Staff of the cemeteries and the funeral houses
3. Officials and staff of airports, airlines, railways,
subways and all public transport (buses, taxis, etc.)
4. Border guards
5. Solid waste and wastewater workers
6. Employees who travel regularly, especially to
contaminated areas
With the increasing incidence of illness and the need for
patient health care, HCWs have been identified as a high
risk group for this infection. Of the 138 patients treated
at Wuhan Hospital, 40 patients (29%) were HCWs.
Among these, 31 (77.5%) worked in the general ward,
7 (17.5%) in the emergency department, and 2 (5%)
worked in the intensive care unit (ICU). It was apparently
a super-spreader patient admitted to the surgical ward
with symptoms of abdominal pain who was able to infect
more than 10 hospital staff with COVID-19 (9).
Dentists and makeup artists are also at high
risk of developing this disease due to face-to-face
communication with clients and exposure to saliva, blood
and exhaled breath, as well as excessive use of sharp
and sharp tools. Therefore, it is important to implement
control measures in these jobs to control infection and
prevent transmission (10).
Flight and ship crews are also at risk of contact with
infected passengers. At least 10 cases were reported
among 1,035 crew of Diamond Princess Ship, which was
quarantined with about 3,600 passengers from February
3rd to February 19th, 2020 in Yokohama, Japan. A
traveler from Hong Kong boarded the ship for a 14-day
voyage to Yokohama on January 20th. This passenger
traveled from Yokohama to Hong Kong and landed there
on January 25th. The ship continued its journey until it
received news on February 1st that the passenger had
tested positive. The ship returned to Yokohama a day
earlier and was quarantined, and guests were isolated in
their cabins (11).
In another study conducted in February 2020, migrant
workers were considered another group at risk of
infection with the new coronavirus. The study said that
these people face more barriers in accessing health
services in the host country (such as access to insurance
services). In addition, mental disorders are more common
in these people and is exacerbated by quarantine due
NEW CORONAVIRUS PREVENTION IN WORKPLACES
to the new coronavirus epidemic and job loss which
ultimately leads to a lower quality of life. Likewise, due
to the lack of reliable information in their language, they
may not understand the seriousness of the epidemic
and how to protect themselves against it. Therefore, it is
recommended that migrant workers have greater access
to health services during epidemics, and public health
campaigns should be available for various languages​​
as soon as possible through various communication
Although COVID-19 has been reported to cause severe
disease in patients without underlying risk factors, the
risk of developing fatal disease with this new virus is
higher in the old adults, patients with underlying diseases
such as cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, respiratory
disease and cancer, or people that have occupational
exposure to hazardous chemicals such as vapors and
gases (13). Therefore individuals with risk factors for a
severe disease should also be kept in mind even if they
are not involved in any of the mentioned risk groups.
Preparing the workplaces to respond to COVID-19
Employers should implement infection control
strategies based on an accurate and technical risk
assessment using the views of health professionals in
the workplace to prevent illness in the organization’s
staff. Of course, the risks associated with COVID-19 are
not the same for everyone and everywhere. For example,
employees at occupational health centers or workers
exposed to hazardous chemical agents are at greater
risk. Having a direct contact with infected or suspected
COVID-19 patients increases the risk of infection and
particular attention should be paid to high-risk cases in
this regard (14). However, given the technical, political
and economic conditions and considerations, the risk
of infection should be assessed and appropriate control
measures should be undertaken. Many of these control
solutions are inexpensive and can be implemented in
the workplace without the use of special equipment
or tools. The most important measures to control the
spread of corona virus disease based on the principles of
occupational health in the workplace are summarized in
Continuing to work despite having symptomatic disease,
which is called “Presenteeism”, is a major issue during an
epidemic (15). Therefore employees must be encouraged
to stay at home during sickness and not come to work
until they are completely healthy and non-contagious.
Extending the sick leave with salary is a way to motivate
sick workers. Moreover, providing a high quality health
insurance is helpful, especially in these difficult times.
Implementing engineering controls is also of utmost
importance. Separating the symptomatic people from
others and their isolation help to halt the spread of the
disease. Moreover, in places (e.g. banks, pharmacies)
that have many costumers or clients, separation of the
staff from costumers using plastic and glass barriers and
providing optimal ventilation is critical.
Administrative controls also have an undeniable
utility in prevention and control of infectious diseases.
Employers must provide accurate and practical
THE ARCHIVES OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY. ABJS.MUMS.AC.IR
VOLUME 8. SUPPLEMENT 1. APRIL 2020
NEW CORONAVIRUS PREVENTION IN WORKPLACES
information regarding personal hygiene and ways to
prevent infection using flyers, poster, pamphlets and
orientation meetings. Following advices from healthcare
professionals and occupational medicine experts is
helpful in this regard. Moreover, employers must limit the
number of personnel in the workplace by implementing
teleworking strategies and reducing the work hours
or even temporary shutting down the occupation.
Continuous cleaning and disinfection of the surfaces and
equipment is also necessary, however using disposable
tools and instruments is more beneficial if possible.
Notably, avoiding to hold ceremonies, conferences and
in-person meeting is also important. A multinational
company held an international business meeting for 109
employees in Singapore from January 20 to 22, 2020. At
this event, Healthy Company staff interacted with other
affected participants, leading to the transmission of the
virus to three Singapore-based employees. In addition
to those infected from Singapore, an employee from
Malaysia, two participants from South Korea and an
employee from England were also infected. They were
reported as cases after leaving Singapore (16).
The use of personal protective equipment (PPE) is
always the last way to control the harmful factors in
the workplace, but for the new coronavirus due to the
rapid spread of the disease and the high contagiousness,
it is recommended to use integrated control methods
i.e. a combination of substitution, engineering and
administrative controls plus personal protective
equipment in the workplace (17). In this regard, it is
essential to use expert opinions such as environmental
and occupational health practitioners.
The spread of coronavirus has reduced the
manufacturing activities globally. According to available
statistics, if the outbreak continues, due to its direct and
indirect effects on business environments, economic
indicators are likely to decline in the near future.
Therefore, given the involvement of almost all countries
of the world in this disease and its progressive trend,
the World Health Organization (WHO) and International
Labor Organization (ILO) have recommended that all
countries should be prepared to prevent and control
the disease. Due to the different socioeconomic status
and patterns of life in different countries, the prevalence
of the disease varies from country to country, and it is
necessary for each country to take appropriate measures
The results of a study in Japan in 2020 showed that
the most important factor in encouraging health
THE ARCHIVES OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY. ABJS.MUMS.AC.IR
VOLUME 8. SUPPLEMENT 1. APRIL 2020
care personnel to work in critical situations such as
epidemics is having confidence in the support of the
state, government and hospital management, and trust
between staff and organizations (19). Another study
in this regard in Thailand suggested that a sense of
trust enhances social interactions and cooperation
among health personnel and also improves motivation,
performance and quality of care (18). One way to
increase trust between the organization and healthcare
staff is to provide staff with frequent information. In
addition, the frequent contact of government officials
and employers with staff and encouraging them creates
a sense of security. Paying compensation if HCWs get
infected can also be an incentive to improve employees’
work quality. Adequate protective equipment and
psychological support should also be available to staff
in an epidemic (20).
In the absence of an appropriate cure for this virus,
the best strategy is to prevent the spread of infection
and control the sources of infection. The main strategies
based on WHO recommendations are timely diagnosis
and reporting of the disease, continuous examination
of the epidemiological pattern of the disease, isolation
of patients, supportive treatments and communitybased control measures. All components of the society,
NEW CORONAVIRUS PREVENTION IN WORKPLACES
including employers, managers and employees, must be
epidemic has not yet reached that country or region.
This has a significant impact on reducing lost work days,
staff absences and slowing the rate of virus spread if an
epidemic reaches the region (21).
Given the increasing prevalence of new corona virus
disease in the world over the past few weeks, it is
imperative that all managers, employers, and business
owners receive the necessary information and training
on prevention and control strategies based on scientific
guidelines and standards. This can be effective in
reducing the number of people infected and preventing
the spread of the virus throughout society.
Conflict of Interest: Not declared
Ehsan Rafeemanesh MD1
Fatemeh Ahmadi MD1
Maryam Memarzadeh MD1
1 Occupational Medicine Department, Faculty of
Mashhad, Iran
1. Liu W, Zhang Q, Chen J, Xiang R, Song H, Shu S, et al.
Detection of Covid-19 in children in early January 2020
in Wuhan, China. N Engl J Med. 2020; 382(14):1370-1.
2. Guan WJ, Ni ZY, Hu Y, Liang WH, Ou CQ, He JX, et al.
Clinical characteristics of coronavirus disease 2019 in
China. N Engl J Med. 2020; In Press.
3. Chan JF, Yuan S, Kok KH, To KK, Chu H, Yang J, et al.
A familial cluster of pneumonia associated with the
2019 novel coronavirus indicating person-to-person
transmission: a study of a family cluster. Lancet. 2020;
4. Bai Y, Yao L, Wei T, Tian F, Jin DY, Chen L, et al. Presumed
asymptomatic carrier transmission of COVID-19.
JAMA. 2020; In Press.
5. Sun P, Lu X, Xu C, Sun W, Pan B. Understanding of
COVID‐19 based on current evidence. J Med Virol.
2020; In Press.
6. Habibzadeh P, Stoneman EK. The novel coronavirus:
a bird’s eye view. Int J Occup Environ Med. 2020;
7. Guidance on preparing workplaces for COVID-19.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
8. CDC Industry Guidance. Interim guidance for
businesses and employers to plan and respond to
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Available
9. Wang D, Hu B, Hu C, Zhu F, Liu X, Zhang J, et al. Clinical
characteristics of 138 hospitalized patients with 2019
novel coronavirus–infected pneumonia in Wuhan,
China. JAMA. 2020; In Press.
10. Peng X, Xu X, Li Y, Cheng L, Zhou X, Ren B. Transmission
routes of 2019-nCoV and controls in dental practice.
Int J Oral Sci. 2020; 12(1):9.
11. Mizumoto K, Chowell G. Transmission potential of the
novel coronavirus (COVID-19) onboard the diamond
princess cruises ship, 2020. Infect Dis Model. 2020;
12. Liem A, Wang C, Wariyanti Y, Latkin CA, Hall BJ. The
neglected health of international migrant workers
in the COVID-19 epidemic. Lancet Psychiatry. 2020;
13. Sun P, Lu X, Xu C, Sun W, Pan B. Understanding of
COVID‐19 based on current evidence. J Med Virol.
2020; In Press.
14. Paull B. COVID-19–what employers need to know.
15. Baker MG, Peckham TK, Seixas NS. Estimating the
burden of United States workers exposed to infection
or disease: a key factor in containing risk of COVID-19
infection. Med Rxiv. 2020; In Press.
16. Sun H, Dickens BL, Chen M, Cook AR, Clapham
THE ARCHIVES OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY. ABJS.MUMS.AC.IR
VOLUME 8. SUPPLEMENT 1. APRIL 2020
HE. Estimating number of global importations of
COVID-19 from Wuhan, risk of transmission outside
mainland China and COVID-19 introduction index
between countries outside Mainland China. Med Rxiv.
2020; In Press.
17. Public Health Ontario. Updated IPAC recommendations
for use of personal protective equipment for care of
individuals with suspect or confirmed COVID-19.
18. Joob B, Wiwanitkit V. COVID-19 in medical personnel:
observation from Thailand. J Hosp Infect. 2020; In
NEW CORONAVIRUS PREVENTION IN WORKPLACES
19. Shigemura J, Ursano RJ, Morganstein JC, Kurosawa
M, Benedek DM. Public responses to the Novel 2019
coronavirus (2019‐nCoV) in Japan: mental health
consequences and target populations. Psychiatry Clin
20. Imai H. Trust is a key factor in the willingness of health
professionals to work during the COVID‐19 outbreak:
experience from the H1N1 pandemic in Japan 2009.
Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2020; In Press.
21. Fadel M, Salomon J, Descatha A. Coronavirus outbreak:
the role of companies in preparedness and responses.
Lancet Public Health. 2020; 5(4):e193.
