COPYRIGHT 2020 © BY THE ARCHIVES OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY
Twelve Lessons on Hospital Leadership during
COVID-19 Pandemic
Seyed Farshad Allameh, MD1, 2; Nasim Khajavirad, MD1, 2; Ali Labaf, MD1, 3; Azim Mirzazadeh, MD1, 2;
Khosro Sadeghniiat-Haghighi, MD1, 4; SM Javad Mortazavi, MD1, 5; Ali Jafarian, MD1, 6
Research performed at Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex, Tehran, Iran
Coronavirus pandemic has been announced by World Health Organization Director General on March 11th, 2020. Imam
the capital city of Tehran, I.R.Iran that entered the crisis and started a serious battle with the disease. The hospital had
principles and reached to some new experiences. As this is probably the most severe health-related crisis in Iran in
the past 100 years, we gathered our lessons learned in the first fifty days of epidemic from the leadership point of view
to share those with all colleagues worldwide. We know that leadership is of pivotal role in such a massive crisis and
focused leadership experiences can help health care providers to manage the crisis while we are in the middle of it.
Level of evidence: IV-V
Keywords: Hospital, Leadership, Pandemic
oronavirus pandemic was announced by WHO
Director-General on March 11th, 2020. Before that,
it was epidemic in a few countries including South
Korea, Iran and Italy after China. China announced the
emergence of new coronavirus on January 1st, 2020, with
a rapid spread in Wuhan city, Hubei province. The first
PCR-positive case was announced in Iran on February
19th, and we admitted our first case on February 21st in
Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex; a complex with 1200
(TUMS), Tehran, I.R. Iran. TUMS owns 14 general and
subspecialty hospitals with a total bed number of 5000.
After the official announcement of coronavirus in media,
we were faced with a crowd of outpatient referral to
our hospital that made us build up an outdoor triage
rapidly and a respiratory clinic in a dedicated area finally
covered by five lines of residents and staff of Infectious
disease, internal medicine, emergency medicine, and
other departments’ residents and staff. We had to change
our hospital setting to admit more and more COVID-19
patients, so the routine function of the hospital was
decreased to minimal except for the emergency services
while the elective admissions were stopped. We reached
to a total number of 770 outpatients visit in day seven, 70
new admissions in day 19, entering 10 adapted Corona
wards. Now, after two months of the rapid spread of
the disease, many hospitals are involved in COVID-19
inpatients care in Tehran, and the trends look downwards.
In the first week of the outbreak in Tehran and after
encountering a crowd of patients, new problems raised
everyday ranging from physical flow of patients to
shortage of ICU beds and human resource balance.
The hospital administration started to cope with the
situation by forming a Crisis Management Committee
including all major stakeholders including senior chief
faculties of different disciplines. A Technical Support
Team comprised of 5 attending staff to gather data, make
information, propose plans and monitor the outcome of
decisions for each problem. Here we are going to share
the lessons we learned during the six passed weeks from
Arch Bone Jt Surg. 2020; 8 (Supplement 1): 277-280. Doi: 10.22038/abjs.2020.47829.2363
THE ARCHIVES OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY. ABJS.MUMS.AC.IR
VOLUME 8. SUPPLEMENT 1. APRIL 2020
the start of the crisis from the leadership point of view.
Looking to past experiences
materials about situations that may or may not be
applicable in similar events. One should first refer
to those documented experiences and choose what
recommendations may be of use in a new situation. We
did so and found very good guidance from 2 papers,
changes we need to implement rapidly to cope with the
Continuous Learning
Problems and challenges in crises with such a global
scope are new to all of us, so we need to learn day by
day (3). For this learning, we need accurate and updated
information every day and a group of wise hands-on
staff not engaged in clinical care to work on. There
were several new findings in different aspects of the
pandemic from testing to treatment during the past
three months. Our leaders have to learn from those and
activate a renovated hospital with borrowing staff from
the others. In only one week, we learned that it was a
wrong plan and stopped it.
Timely decision making
Decisions should be made in a time frame of hours.
Making perfect decisions means no-decision. We were
faced with 500 outpatient visits a day and more than
60 new inpatient admissions without any established
setup, considering the contagious nature of the disease
and risks for caregivers. You may not have enough time to
arrange all settings and provide all equipment.
Daily interaction with the frontliners
The crisis is a dynamic and rapidly changing process (3).
To lead it in a better way, we had to take as much input as
we could from the frontline and respond appropriately.
We changed our outpatient emergency respiratory clinic
setting three times in ten days with an increased number
of patients to 800 in 24 hours as our first plan could not
fit the needs.
Participatory leadership
Participatory leadership is a mandate, not an option in
such a big crisis. How could we make a general surgeon
or otolaryngologist to visit COVID-19 patients without
their enthusiasm? Without the participation of all staff
and especially senior ones, we could not engage them
with enthusiasm and interest. For such participation, the
leaders should have heared the feedbacks and discuss
different aspects of the job with all stakeholders in a
group or bilateral meetings (4).
Effective Communication
Communication is a milestone in crisis. Without
effective communication, we cannot keep our colleagues
informed of what is going on. In our hospital, we had a
daily meeting for the first 30 days of epidemics with all
LEADERSHIP OF HOSPITAL
protection, of course. A daily report of the hospital
activities and general information about the condition
in Tehran and the whole country were shared in those
meetings. New plans like opening a new COVID-19 floor
or expanding ICU wards were announced. Informal
ways such as WhatsApp groups are more effective and
mandatory to keep the pace of communications and
Delegation of jobs and works is the only way to avoid
fatigue and inefficiency of the crisis management team.
No one can manage all aspects in detail and make the best
decisions on his own in this situation. In the first week of
the epidemic, we assigned different staff for outpatient
clinics, inpatient treatment supervision, infection control,
and many other jobs. Clarification of different tasks, and
determining who is in charge of each task, makes the
leader confident for the accomplishment of the jobs.
Professionalism based on values
Emphasizing on values and protecting morale of all
staff is one of the duties of the leaders. The value of
saving lives in a crisis, no matter what is our specialties
or academic degrees, is the milestone of the practice
of medicine and professionalism (5). All efforts should
be made to reinforce this essence in the hospital. At
the same time, you need to support the staff on daily
hard work and keep them vital. You may provide a
refreshment package or a hotel for rest after night shifts
for doctors and nurses and provide donated foods for
workers and personnel. In our experience, all of these
measures were applied and made good feedbacks as
observed by external inspectors.
Final Decision Maker
The top leader should have the power to make the final
decision when all discussions are done. Which building
should be evacuated for expansion of COVID-19 floors?
Which group of staff has to visit COVID-19 patients? How
should residents of other disciplines help for the massive
outpatient clinic? And so on. Some of these decisions may
be in contrast to academic routines, but necessary in a
Managing Conflicts
Managing the conflicts is another important issue
during the crisis (6, 7). When a resident does not show
up in his shift or is worried about the Personal Protective
Equipment (PPE) they need, one official should intervene
to solve the conflict. Many conflicts arise in a crisis like
COVID-19 pandemic having hard work tension, worries
on personal and family health and community stress. You
may need to take an hour to convince a senior staff why
the hospital policy for PPE is the WHO protocol and not
others, and you may fail and need some help.
Considering All
Nobody should feel a sense of discrimination. The
leaders should behave in a manner that the doorman,
THE ARCHIVES OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY. ABJS.MUMS.AC.IR
VOLUME 8. SUPPLEMENT 1. APRIL 2020
ICU nurse, and Emergency Medicine resident visiting
patients in the respiratory emergency room all feel they
are protected and supported according to the protocols
and nobody has any additional privilege. Especially
for a crisis like a viral pandemic that giving service is
accompanied by high and serious risk for caregivers
and even being in the hospital is considered as a risk,
all personnel should be confident to their leaders as
wise and just. It is not an easy task of course, because
of distrust that may happen between the leadership and
the frontline staff.
LEADERSHIP OF HOSPITAL
Team of Leaders
Finally, a team of leaders is needed for a large hospital
like ours because no one can manage all the tasks
mentioned above correctly on his own. A great team of
attending physicians and surgeons was formed early in
the course of the crisis to support the hospital officials in
this huge work which is continued.
The above-mentioned principles made IKHC one of the
1 shows the number of patients visited on daily basis
THE ARCHIVES OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY. ABJS.MUMS.AC.IR
VOLUME 8. SUPPLEMENT 1. APRIL 2020
shows daily admission of COVID-19. The total number
of admitted patients touched 300 in April 10th, 2020.
During this time, IKHC allocated 331 floor beds and 18
emergency beds to COVID-19 patients. The Number of
allotted ICU beds was increased form 25 beds to 98. IKHC
laboratory started PCR testing with 50 tests per day and
increased to more than 150 tests per day. These numbers
shows the ability of hospital for capacity building in
massive crises.
COVID-19 pandemic is rapidly spreading around the
world and maybe the most severe health-related crisis in
the past 100 years. We do not know how and when this
course of events is the best practice or not; however, we
know that leadership is of pivotal role in such a massive
crisis as we see its effects in all aspects of the pandemic
throughout the world.
LEADERSHIP OF HOSPITAL
Seyed Farshad Allameh MD1, 2
Nasim Khajavirad MD1, 2
Ali Labaf MD1, 3
Azim Mirzazadeh MD1, 2
Khosro Sadeghniiat-Haghighi MD1, 4
SM Javad Mortazavi MD1, 5
Ali Jafarian MD1, 6
of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
1. Tsai MC, Arnold JL, Chuang CC, Chi CH, Liu CC, Yang YJ.
Implementation of the hospital emergency incident
command system during an outbreak of severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS) at a hospital in Taiwan,
ROC. J Emerg Med. 2005; 28(2):185-96.
SARS-lessons in disaster management. Critical Care.
3. Heifetz RA, Laurie DL. The work of leadership. Harv
Bus Rev. 1997; 75(1):124-34.
4. Bland CJ, Starnaman S, Hembroff L, Perlstadt H, Henry
R, Richards R. Leadership behaviors for successful
curricula. Acad Med. 1999; 74(11):1227-37.
5. Pendleton D, King J. Values and leadership. BMJ. 2002;
6. Fisher R, Ury WL, Patton B. Getting to yes: negotiating
agreement without giving in. London: Penguin; 2011.
7. Ury W. Getting past no: negotiating in difficult
situations. New York: Bantam; 2007.
