Molecular and Serological Tests for COVID-19.
Laboratory and Point-of-Care Diagnostics
Robert Kubina 1, *
and Arkadiusz Dziedzic 2
40-055 Katowice, Poland
Department of Conservative Dentistry with Endodontics, Faculty of Medical Sciences in Zabrze,
Abstract: Validated and accurate laboratory testing for Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is a crucial part of the timely management of Coronavirus Disease
2019 (COVID-19) disease, supporting the clinical decision-making process for infection control at the
healthcare level and detecting asymptomatic cases. This would facilitate an appropriate treatment,
a prompt isolation and consequently deceleration of the pandemic. Various laboratory tests can
identify the genetic material of SARS-CoV-2 that causes COVID-19 in specimens, or specific anti-viral
antibodies in blood/serum. Due to the current pandemic situation, a development of point-of-care
diagnostics (POCD) allows us to substantially accelerate taking clinical decisions and implement
compares the available POCD and those currently under development, including quantitative reverse
transcription PCR (RT-qPCR), serology immunoassays (SIAs) and protein microarray method (PMM)
designed for standard and rapid COVID-19 diagnosis.
Keywords: COVID-19; SARS-CoV-2; in vitro diagnostic tests; RT-qPCR; serology immunoassays
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by the novel coronavirus Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2, formerly known as 2019-nCoV), appeared in China for
the first time, and subsequently spread worldwide [1,2]. On 30 January 2020, the World Health
Organization (WHO) officially announced the COVID-19 epidemics as a threat to public health
internationally, and subsequently, in March 2020, the global situation escalated into the COVID-19
427,000 deaths as of 13 June 2020 [3]. As a result of this rapidly progressing COVID-19 pandemic and
the limited laboratory-based molecular testing capacities, new point-of-care (POC), scalable rapid
diagnostic tests have been invented recently as easy-to-use tools to allow COVID-19 diagnostics outside
of laboratory settings. What is more, the urgent need to multiply testing for COVID-19 has been clearly
identified as an essential element of the anti-coronavirus strategy all over the world.
The diagnostic sensitivity, specificity and accuracy concerning suspected COVID-19 infection,
based on controlled testing and performance data from clinical settings, is of substantial importance
in the context of limiting the scope of coronavirus epidemics. Unreliable and unproved tests may
not detect patients with active infection or may incorrectly indicate COVID-19-negative patients as
positive, hampering healthcare efforts. The diagnostic laboratory and point-of-care tests (POCTs)
used in order to detect SARS-CoV-2 are, first of all, reference tests based on molecular technique
real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction assay (RT-qPCR) as well
as serological antibody-detecting and antigen-detecting tests, for auxiliary purposes. At present,
only molecular quantitative reverse transcription PCR (RT-qPCR) testing of respiratory tract samples
is the recommended method for the identification and laboratory confirmation of COVID-19 cases,
as these methods were evaluated for their quality and safety through the World Health Organization
(WHO) protocols [4,5]. On the other hand, based on current scientific evidence, WHO recommends the
use of POC immunodiagnostic tests for research purposes and, at present, they should not be utilized
in a clinical decision-making setting and in patient care until fully validated, with supporting data
available. However, they can be useful in epidemiologic research or disease surveillance and further
evolve as a critical step to develop COVID-19 vaccine in future. At the time of increased demand for
hospital services, clinicians, governments and health services urgently need a fast, sensitive, but at the
same time inexpensive diagnostic test, in order to rapidly manage patients, regarding admissions to
hospitals meant for COVID-19 treatment. Therefore, the role of an approved and reliable diagnostic
test in the COVID-19 care pathway is of the utmost importance.
As in the case of other infectious diseases, the RT-qPCR method, as well as serological tests,
Genetic assay based on the RT-qPCR technique, performed in real time, especially plays a role at
the early stages of viral infection, when the virus multiplies quickly, as this technique enables direct
detection of the pathogen’s genetic material. A different approach in diagnosing infection is represented
by serological methods, based on detecting—in blood serum—of antibodies that act specifically against
viral proteins, which are produced in response to SARS-CoV-2. Serological IVD tests detect antibodies
which are responsible for neutralizing the virus; therefore, this implies that they are used when the
immunological reaction against SARS-CoV-2 virus is already taking place. These IVD measures can
of subjects who already developed immunity. The results of serological IVD tests should not be used
as basis for diagnosing, ruling out infection with SARS-CoV-2, or informing about infection status [6].
The relatively quick discovery of the composition of the full genome of SARS-CoV-2 early during
the epidemics made it easier to develop specific starters and normalized laboratory protocols for
COVID-19. The protocol of the first RT-qPCR test, focused on RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
end of January 2020. Providing a brief description, the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 is equipped
with a receptor-binding domain (RBD), a structure similar to the ‘original’ SARS-CoV that emerged for
the first time in 2002. Functionally important ORFs (1a and 1b) and other main structural proteins,
including the spike (S), membrane (M), envelope (E), and nucleocapsid (N) proteins, are also well
interrelated and clearly annotated. According to previous reports, the M and E proteins are essential
for virus assembly, while the S protein is crucial for affinity and attachment to host cells, as the RBD of
the S protein enables binding with angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). The S protein on the
structural protein of SARS-CoV-2 is responsible for the transcription and replication of viral RNA,
the packaging of the encapsulated genome into virions, and interactions with the cell cycle of host cells.
In addition, coronaviruses contain the N protein, which has a substantial immunogenic ability and
antigens for serodiagnosis of COVID-19, similarly to other diagnostic methods that were implemented
for diagnosing SARS disease, based on S/N proteins [7].
PCR COVID-19
COVID-19 genetic
spike spike
sequences of
on [8]).on [8]).
or nucleocapsid
Validated COVID-19
COVID-19 Diagnosis
At present,
is going
on worldwide
which will
At present,
is going
on worldwide
to to
will simplify
speed up
tests, with
further awaiting
the completion
of the and
and Drug
with further
of the procedure
Food and
Administration (FDA) or In Vitro Diagnostics (IVD) certificate to be issued. It is worth noting that a
(FDA) or In Vitro Diagnostics (IVD) certificate to be issued. It is worth noting that a large portion of
large portion of available tests are provided merely with the Research Use Only (RUO) certificate,
available tests are provided merely with the Research Use Only (RUO) certificate, which in fact does
which in fact does not imply anything concerning test quality or its validation. More rigorous tests
not imply
test quality
or with
its validation.
to products
to productsconcerning
certified as IVD,
the ISO13485
In addition,
as IVD,
In addition,
IVD they
to local
to local
CE marking
in Europe,
and hence
as CE of
in Europe,
and hence
with Directive
the European
and of
of 27 October
1998 on in
vitro of
medical devices,
of clinical
the European
and of
of evaluation,
1998 on in
SARSwith an extensive evaluation, including the validation of clinical samples.
in the
with COVID-19
symptoms, byofdetecting
genetic tests collected
are meant
for the
and differentiation
in the material/specimens collected from patients with COVID-19 symptoms, by detecting
specimens (sputum, tracheal aspirate or bronchoalveolar lavage, swabs from nasopharynx and
sequences unique for SARS-CoV-2. The genetic material of the virus is extracted from specimens
pharynx, blood, urine, or stool) and amplified by means of the PCR technique in real time, with the
(sputum, tracheal aspirate or bronchoalveolar lavage, swabs from nasopharynx and pharynx, blood,
use of reverse transcription (RT), and detected by means of fluorescent reporter probes specific to
or stool) and
amplified by means of the PCR technique in real time, with the use of reverse
of fluorescent
At present, RT-qPCR
in the worldreporter
market, which
meant to
ORF1ab, [8,9].
tests are
in the worldThose
to detect
E, present,
N, or S gene
in various
and E, N,
test protocol
is complex
and costly,
for large,
or S gene
tests differ
Tests usually
h, yet
the logistic
time. diagnostic
The test protocol
is complex
and costly,
for large, concerning
laboratories. Tests usually take 4–6 h, yet the logistic requirements concerning sending clinical
with WHOtime
that execution
is 24 h at the most
[10].tests must enable the detection of three
genes in a single reaction: E gene, N gene, and RdRP gene. This allows us to detect viruses from the
In accordance with WHO recommendations, RT-qPCR tests must enable the detection of three
beta-coronavirus group (E gene), as well as to identify SARS-CoV-2 virus (N gene and RdRP, ORF1ab).
in a asingle
reaction: E gene, N gene, and RdRP gene. This allows us to detect viruses from the
design guarantees double confirmation in cases of infection, it also limits the risk of obtaining
as well asonly
to identify
gene and
false negativegroup
in case
of detecting
one targetSARS-CoV-2
for SARS-CoV-2.
Such of
a design
in cases
of infection,
it also
of obtaining
doubtful results,
which case the
of verification
false negative
in dedicated
case of detecting
only one
to SARS-CoV-2
is presented
in reduces
of obtaining doubtful results, in which case the necessity of verification occurs [11]. A comparison
Name of the Kit
ORF1ab RdRP
Manual test
1copy™ COVID-19 qPCR Kit
AB ANALITICA srl
ADT Biotech
LyteStar 2019-nCoV RT-PCR
altona Diagnostics
RealStar® SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR
USA EUA; CE-IVD
Atila Biosystems
BIOMAXIMA S.A.
COVID Detection
SARS-CoV-2 Real Time PCR
USA EUA
USA EUA; CE-IVD; RUO
AccuPower® SARS-CoV-2
Real-Time RT-PCR
BGI Health (HK)
Real-time fluorescent RT-PCR
USA EUA; CE-IVD; Canada
CerTest Biotec, S.L
VIASURE SARS-CoV-2 Real
Time PCR Kit
CerTest Biotec, S.L
VIASURE SARS-CoV-2 S gene
Real Time PCR Kit
Logix Smart Coronavirus
CTK Biotech, Inc.
Aridia COVID-19 Real Time
PCR Test
DAAN Gene Co
Detection Kit for 2019 Novel
CE-IVD; China
Edinburgh Genetics
COVID-19 Real-time PCR
Testing Kit
CE-IVD; China FDA
Gencurix Inc.
GenePro COVID-19 Detection
Genomictree, Inc.
AccuraTect RT-qPCR
KH Medical
RADI COVID-19 Detection Kit
Real-Time PCR Kit
SrongStep® Novel Coronavirus
PerkinElmer Inc.
Realtime RT-PCR
CE-IVD; WHO-EUL
Primerdesign Ltd.
COVID-19 genesig Real-Time
PCR assay
CE-IVD; USA EUA;WHO
R-Biopharm AG
RIDA® GENE SARS-CoV-2
SD BIOSENSOR Inc.
STANDARD M nCoV
Real-Time Detection Kit
CE-IVD; USA EUA; Brazil
TIB/Roche Diagn.
LightMix Modular SARS-CoV-2
TIB/Roche Diagn
LightMix Modular SARS-CoV-2
TIB/Roche Diagn
LightMix Modular SARS-CoV-2
SD BIOSENSOR
STANDARD M nCoV
Real-Time Detection kit
USA EUA; CE-IVD; Brazil
Seegene, Inc.
Allplex 2019-nCoV assay
USA EUA; CE-IVD; Canada
Sansure Biotech Inc
Novel Coronavirus
(2019-nCoV) Nucleic Acid
USA EUA; CE-IVD; China
Sente Biolab
COVID-19 qRT PCR Detection
Shanghai ZJ
Liferiver Novel Coronavirus
Multiplex RT-PCR
CE-IVD, China FDA
Thermo Fisher
TaqPath™ COVID-19 CE-IVD
RT-PCR Kit
Name of the Kit
DMed 2019-nCoV RT-qPCR
Detection Kit
US FDA—CE-IVD
Abbott Molecular
Abbott RealTime SARS-CoV-2
EUA test
US FDA—CE-IVD
Xpert Xpress SARS-CoV-2
US FDA-EUA
ORF1ab RdRP
Automated Lab-based, near-POC NAT or POC NAT
Roche Molecular
US FDA—WHO EUL
Sente Biolab
Senteligo COVID-19 qRT PCR
Detection Kit
Solgent Co.Ltd
DiaPlexQ™ Novel Coronavirus
Star Array Ptd. Ltd.
8-min RT-qPCR direct PCR
VereCoV™ Detection Kit and
The standard protocol with the application of the RT-qPCR method is demanding and
time-consuming. For that reason, scientists constantly strive to invent more up to date modifications of
the RT-qPCR tests, which would cut down the time required for analyses [13].
Bosch Healthcare Solutions announced that they had developed a quick test, which may provide
the results in 2.5 h; it is a fast testing kit for the Vivalytic platform. It is a fully automated PCR test,
which is performed by simply inserting the swab into a cartridge, which is subsequently analyzed
by the machine. This universal platform for molecular laboratory diagnostics, with the option for
various samples testing and different analytical methods, can be carried out as an entirely automated
mode within a short time. Unfortunately, the equipment has not been available for many healthcare
institutions yet, and the diagnostic cartridges are dedicated solely to the specific analyzing device [14].
BioMaxima has invented a test whose main advantages include a short waiting time; the results
can be obtained in a mere 2 h. Moreover, the analytical sensitivity of the test, being at the level of
≥10 RNA copies per reaction, is higher than in other comparable systems. It seems important that the
molecular test kit contains reagents with substantially enhanced stability, which allows us to transport
it safely and store it at room temperature, whereas many other tests available on the market need to
be stored in a freezer and to be transported in dry ice. Storing such reagents, even for a short time,
in conditions that deviate from those indicated is risky and may result in generating false negative test
results [15].
sensitive than the previous ones and it implies the possibility of examining patients at earlier stages,
reacting more quickly, and effectively preventing the spread of coronavirus. This new test for diagnosing
SARS-CoV-2 provides rapid results within 30 min, whereas the fastest current methods that concentrate
on viral RNA give results in 1.5 to 2 h, i.e., three times faster than the presently quickest testing
methods, and which requires the application of relatively simple technical devices. Apart from those
advantages, the scientists responsible for the test’s development claim that it may even help detect
patients infected with coronavirus at earlier stages, in comparison with current methods, while its
results can be read with the “naked eye”, which makes it more available for a wider spectrum of
healthcare units and specialists. This fast-molecular test has been recently registered by the FDA and
utilizes a diagnostic system, which, in recent years, proved to function perfectly in diagnosing multiple
infections (including Hepatitis C Virus—HCV and influenza) [16]. RNA detection may be performed
by means of RT-qPCR or reverse transcription–loop amplification (RT–LAMP). A standard RT-qPCR
test takes 90 to 120 min on average to test a set of samples, whereas LAMP may be completed in
30 min. Indirect isothermal amplification (LAMP) is a fast technology of DNA amplification, which is
applied in the detection of pathogens such as viruses or bacteria. LAMP reaction usually takes place
at constant temperature, and the target DNA may be amplified in 30 min. LAMP method utilizes
four or six starters for binding six regions of target DNA, its specificity is exceptionally high. Because
SARS-CoV-2 is a RNA-type virus with a length of some 30 kb, a single reverse transcriptase (RT)
reaction and LAMP may, jointly, significantly shorten the reaction time, omitting the stage of purifying
cDNA from reverse transcriptase, and thanks to this, SARS-CoV-2 may be quickly detected. It has
to be noted that similarly, a one-step RT-qPCR method does not require cDNA purification (a single
six starters in each set/kit) focused on viral RNA of SARS-CoV-2 in the regions of ORF1ab, S gene,
and N gene. For the interpretation of results, a colorimetric method has been applied, which enables
the reading of the results of viral RNA amplification by the naked eye, without the necessity of using
expensive equipment. Moreover, the sensitivity of the method may be 80 copies of viral RNA per
1 mL in the sample and single stage process (without separate RNA extraction), which enables the
amplification of RNA directly from the sample [17,18].
Performing examinations with the use of fast molecular tests may be particularly useful in
Emergency Departments and admission rooms. POCTs are needed to speed up the process of taking
clinical decisions and decrease the workload for centralized testing laboratories [16]. POCT means that
test results are instantly delivered in the patient care settings, such as hospitals, urgent care centers and
emergency rooms, instead of the use of expensive and time-consuming laboratory processes.
Additionally, the American company Cepheid developed a quick test which, as they declare,
takes 45 min, while the Dutch pharmacists owning Qiagen developed a 1-h test. The US Food and Drug
diagnostics, Xpert Xpress SARS-CoV-2, according to a statement from the agency. The test was designed
to provide detection of novel coronavirus within a short period of 45 min, using specimens from a
nasopharyngeal swab, nasal wash/aspirate. Another POCT, the Xpert Xpress SARS-CoV-2 test cartridge
is dedicated to detecting SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid utilizing RT-qPCR and does not require the use of
reagents. In the contrary, the GeneXpert System needs the test to be run in a CLIA-approved laboratory
(Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments) or in a selection of patient care settings [19].
It is equally important to understand that RT-qPCR tests have also certain limitations. They are the
most useful in case of positive results, although they appear to have less diagnostic value in situations
when COVID-19 must be ruled out. Negative RT-qPCR test results do not necessarily indicate that
person has not contracted an infectious disease, as other individual factors also need to be considered,
such as exposure risk and potential laboratory errors. The false negative results may occur if the
sample has not been properly collected, transported, or handled/treated, or as a result of the improper
extraction of nucleic acid from clinical materials [9]. Moreover, the false positive results can be related
to the situation where the sample contains inhibitors of amplification, or an insufficient amount of
virus molecules. On the contrary, a false positive result may be due to the cross-contamination of the
sample during its handling or preparation, or between patient samples. What is more, the influence of
vaccines, antiviral drugs, antibiotics, chemotherapeutic agents, or immunosuppressive drugs has not
been taken into consideration. Moreover, the set/kit does not exclude diseases caused by other bacterial
or viral pathogens. The negative results do not exclude infection and should not be the sole basis for
patients’ treatment. Test results when using the kit serve clinical purposes only. Clinical diagnosis
and treatment of patients should be considered in conjunction with the manifestations and symptoms,
medical history, response to treatment or other laboratory tests [9]. In general, the sensitivity of this
molecular method may vary depending on specimen collection (broncho-alveolar lavage, sputum,
nasal swabs or throat swabs) and, what is more, the accuracy depends upon stage of infection, the rate
of SARS-CoV-2 multiplication, and also the degree of clearance. Interestingly, the provided values
of RT-qPCR accuracies seem to be higher for in vitro validation by utilizing SARS-CoV-2-dedicated
primers and cultures in highly controlled laboratory settings [20].
It is assumed that the optimal outcome and ‘clear-cut diagnostic gold standard’ might depend
upon the development of hybrid assays in order to minimize the fraction of false negative results.
The enhanced RT-qPCR test combined with serological immunoassays (either antibody-detecting or
antigen-detecting), would bring an additional diagnostic value for accurate and quick COVID-19
diagnosis in vitro diagnostics, when the human body reacts to an infectious bio-stimulant [21].
Evaluation of Molecular RT-qPCR Tests that Detect the RNA Nucleic Acid of SARS-CoV-2
The progress made in recent years in the diagnostics of infections enables the application,
often simultaneously, of numerous methods in order to detect respiratory viruses effectively. The choice
patient population to be tested, as well as the technical abilities and experience of the testing unit.
The validation of RT-qPCR tests seems to be an important step in combating the new coronavirus.
One of the most significant parameters regarding the efficiency of the diagnostic procedure is most
probably the one related to the minimum amount of analyte, which may be detected and quantitatively
determine by means of a particular test. The parameters describing those properties are known as
limit of detection (”LoD”) and limit of quantification (”LoQ”). In many laboratories, LoD is used
interchangeably with “sensitivity”, “analytical sensitivity”, or/and “detection limit.”. This may be
misleading, though, as “sensitivity” is also understood and used in other ways. Sensitivity and clinical
(diagnostic) specificity are two different parameters. Diagnostic sensitivity is the proportion of true
positive results to the sum of true positive and true negative results. A sensitivity ratio of 100% implies
that all the sick people have been identified. The specificity of a test is the proportion of true negative
results to the sum of true negative and false positive ones. The specificity of 100% implies that all
healthy people in a given test have been correctly identified as healthy/not having the condition.
still one can notice differences in analytical sensitivity of the test (LOD). The vast majority of molecular
tests kits contain a so-called ‘internal positive control’ (IPC), that can be utilized either as an extraction
control or internal control. The IPC is essential for an evaluation of whether the genetical material
extraction procedure and amplification stage were carried out correctly. The failure in IPC detection
using a patient’s specimen may indicate the improper extraction of nucleic acid from clinical material
as a consequence of nucleic acid loss or the transposition of PCR inhibitors and the lack of sufficient
biological material in the collected sample. It needs to be noted that many molecular tests may not
here that detect the RNA of SARS-CoV-2 contain IPC.
Another important factor which describes a diagnostic test is the analytical specificity. It is the
ability of a test to detect a specific target, e.g., a virus. It is of great importance to check whether
the starters used in PCR test are specific to a given virus. There are two components of analytical
sensitivity: cross-reactivity and interference. Cross-reactivity may occur if, in a sample collected
from a patient, there are organisms which are genetically related that imitate the virus analysed,
from the perspective of cross-reactivity; unfortunately, that analysis is selective and does not concern
the same micro-organisms.
Name of the Kit
Limit of
Detection LOD
altona Diagnostics
RealStar® SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR
Atila BioSystems Inc.
Atila iAMP COVID-19 Detection
BGI Health (HK) Co. Ltd.
Real-time Fluorescent RT-PCR kit for
ARGENE® SARS-COV-2 R-GENE®
SARS-CoV-2 Real-Time
RT-PCR Kit
Boditech Med. Inc.
ExAmplar COVID-19 real-time
PCR kit (L)
CerTest Biotec
VIASURE SARS-CoV-2 Real Time
PCR Detection Kit
Detection Kit for 2019 Novel
Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) RNA
EURORealTime SARS-CoV-2
DAAN Gene Co. Ltd.
GeneFirst Ltd.
KH Medical Co. Ltd.
Primerdesign Ltd.
The Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV)
Nucleic Acid Test Kit
RADI COVID-19 Detection Kit
Coronavirus COVID-19
Real-Time PCR assay
GENE SARS-CoV-2 RUO
SD Biosensor Inc.
STANDARD M nCoV Real-Time
Detection Kit
Seegene Inc.
Allplex™ 2019-nCoV Assay
R-Biopharm AG
Shanghai Kehua
KHB Diagnostic kit for SARS-CoV-2
Nucleic Acid (Real-time PCR)
Tib Molbiol
ModularDx Kit SARS-CoV
(COVID19) E-gene (Tib Molbiol) +
LightCycler Multiplex RNA Virus
Vela Diagnostics
ViroKey™ SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR Test
Name of Test
Human coronavirus NL 63
Human coronavirus OC229E
Human coronavirus OC43
Human coronavirus HKU1
Human Metapneumovirus
Parainfluenza virus 1
Parainfluenza virus 2
Parainfluenza virus 3
Parainfluenza virus 4
Influenza A virus
Influenza B Virus
Enterovirus (e.g., EV68)
Respiratory syncytial virus A
Respiratory syncytial virus B
Chlamydia pneumoniae
Hemophilus influenzae
Legionella pneumophila
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Streptococcus pyogenes
Bordetella parapertussis
Bordetella bronchiseptica
Bordetella pertussis
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Pneumocystis jirovecii (PJP)
Candida albicans
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Staphylococcus epidermis
Staphylococcus salivarius
Staphylococcus aureus
Human immunodeficiency
virus type 1,2
Hepatitis virus (A, B, C)
Logix Smart
PCR Testing
qPCR Kit
RT-PCR Kit
Biotec, S.L
SD BIOSENSOR
Bio-Products PerkinElmer®
SARS-CoV-2 STANDARD M
Detection Kit
Inc. Allplex
Combo Kit
EUA test
Xpert Xpress
No data available (nd); does not cross-react with analyzed pathogen (-).
3. Emerged Rapid Immunodiagnostic (Serology Immunoassays) Tests
Immunological methods are, most often, the chemiluminescent assaying of immunoglobulin IgG
and IgM for SARS-CoV-2 from blood on an analyzer, or immunochromatographic assessment in the
form of rapid POCTs, not requiring additional equipment. The methods of detecting anti-SARS-CoV-2
antibodies, despite the ongoing research to develop them further, may or even should be applied
during the coronavirus epidemics [22,23]. After about a week from the first clinical manifestations,
the sensitivity of molecular diagnostics (PCR) diminishes gradually for SARS-CoV-2 infections, due to
have false negative results, despite the ongoing infection.
3.1. Lateral Flow Immunoassay
Among the many contemporary technologies available, special attention should be paid to rapid
lateral flow immunoassay (LFIA), also referred to as immunochromatographic tests. Perhaps they
are not so much appreciated in the scientific community as PCR methods or Enzyme-Linked
Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA tests), despite the fact that they do find application in diagnostics
more and more often. They differ, depending on the type of test, but the basic principle of their
action is invariably the same—they make use of the unique property that antibodies possess, that of
uncomplicated and relatively inexpensive tool meant for detecting the presence (or absence) of a given
component in the examined specimen, such as the presence of a virus in an analyzed blood sample.
Examination with the use of those tests is possible for various types of test material—whole human
blood, blood plasma, serum, stool, urine, sweat, cerebrospinal fluid, or even tears [9]. The test principle
is based on an immunological method, using specific antibodies, most often in complex with colloidal
gold, where a drop of the examined substance first moves along the nitrocellulose membrane using
capillary phenomena. After the sample is absorbed by the membrane, the antigen (should the test prove
to be positive) binds to the colloidal gold complex and respective antibodies. Consequently, the effect
of that reaction is the formation of a complex, which will be detected by the test. The interpretation
of results consists of confirmation or ruling out of the presence of antigens in the examined sample,
based on color test strips that appear in the test [21,22]. The brief comparison of advantages and
Short reaction time for most tests, amounting to 5–20 min
Suboptimal sensitivity, results often false negative,
particularly during enhanced activity of the virus
performed in outpatient clinics or at patient’s bed.
Despite substantial specificity sometimes the results
are false negative, particularly when the virus is not
much active.
Reading most often possible with ‘naked eye’.
It is necessary to verify positive or doubtful results.
Small amount of material to be collected, variety of material.
Increased risk of operator becoming infected
“best before” date distant
(usually 18 months from manufacturing date)
At present, most immunoenzymatic tests available are based on the immunochromatic technique.
The difference between those tests depends upon the molecule assayed (p/c or antigens), structure,
performance time, and diagnostic material. It may be supposed that, in future, rapid tests will enable
easier and quicker diagnostics of many diseases, without the necessity of performing tedious and
complicated procedures. This would reduce the waiting time for obtaining results, and accelerate
3.2. Immunoenzymatic and Immunofluorimetric Assays
The detection of specific SARS-CoV-2 serum antibodies allows for a rapid, cost-effective,
and reasonably sensitive clinical diagnosis of COVID-19, as immunoglobulins such as IgM provide
the initial humoral response during the first stage of viral infection, prior to the onset of the adaptive,
high-affinity IgG response essential for long-term immunological memory. Research indicates that after
SARS infection, antibodies of the IgM class may be detected in patient’s blood about 6 days after the
infection, while IgG may be already detected after 8 days. As SARS-CoV-2 belongs to the same large
family of viruses, which includes those causing Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) and Severe
Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), it should be assumed that the process of producing antibodies
will be similar to that in case of other viruses belonging to that family, while the detection of IgG
antibodies and IgM antibodies acting against SARS-CoV-2 may be an indication of infection. Moreover,
the detection of IgM antibodies usually indicates a recent exposure to SARS-CoV-2, whereas the
detection of IgG antibodies in case of COVID-19 indicates exposure to the virus some time ago [30].
Serological tests, detecting solely the IgM class of antibodies, should find applications for diagnostic
purposes. When using tests which detect both IgM and IgG antibodies, one should remember that a
from serological tests do not exclude SARS-CoV-2 infection, as the ‘window period’ (delay in the
production of antibodies) may exceed 7 days. Serological tests may also give false positive results.
This may be the case of past or ongoing infection with virus strains other than SARS-CoV-2, such as
coronavirus HKU1, NL63, OC43, or 229E. Moreover, the first tests assessing the titer of IgA class
antibodies have been launched, which, from the perspective of immunology, is of extreme importance,
as it provides the possibility of testing for antibodies in a material other than blood samples collected
from patients, e.g., respiratory tract secretions.
Type of Test
Phase of Infection
The window period for a test designed to detect a specific disease
Early stage of infection
Active phase of infection
Late or recurrent stage of infection
Early stage of infection. PCR result may be false negative *
Past infection (recover) *
The recovery stage of infection, or PCR result may be false negative *
No infection and no special symptoms
P(+)—positive; N(−)—negative. * Human coronaviruses (HCoV) OC43, 229E, NL63, and HKU1 may cause false
positive ELISA results.
Serological tests are thus applied as an adjunctive method, for monitoring the epidemiological
situation, yet they may be performed faster and are less costly than genetic tests. This diagnostic
method has a limited sensitivity, yet efforts to improve it are ongoing, as it is useful for monitoring the
infection. Due to insufficient data concerning, among others, the dynamics of immunological response
to infection and the diagnostic value of available tests for detecting IgM and IgG class antibodies
(comprising sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive value), in many countries, it is
immunochromatographic tests for SARS-CoV-2 based on sensitivity, specificity, sample type and test
performance time.
Diagnostics 2020, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW
of the selected immunochromatographic tests for SARS-CoV-2 based on sensitivity, specificity,
sample type and test performance time.
manufacturers’ specification).
IgG/IgM Rapid
Test Cassette
COVID-19 IgMIgG Rapid Test
RAPID TEST
Tianjin Beroni
IgG/IgM Antibody
Detection Kit
Test name of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) serological tests, including
to manufacturers’
Clinical Specificity
Clinical Sensitivity
Test Name
Clinical Specificity
Clinical Sensitivity
IgM Sensitivity
Clinical Specificity IgM
Clinical Sensitivity
IgG Specificity
Clinical Specificity IgG
Clinical Sensitivity Positive
Clinical SpecificityValue
at prevalence =
Positive Predictive
at or IgG)
or IgG)
at prevalence
Negative Predictive
or IgG)
or IgG)
IgG/IgM Rapid
Test Cassette
IgM-IgG Rapid
Test kit
Tianjin Beroni
IgG/IgM Antibody
Detection Kit
In serological IVD, the so-called ‘window period’ is of much importance—that is, the time when
specific antibodies
are notimmunochromatographic
In the
phase of an based
of selected
production of antibodies is initiated, but their level is still low, and thus test results may prove negative.
Anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies appear quite late, i.e., a few days after clinical manifestations, which is
serological tests cannot be used as a basic tool in diagnosing SARS-CoV-2 infections [32].
of selected immunochromatographic
tests for
SARS-CoV-2 based onSample
specificity, Accu-Tell
sample type
10 µL of whole blood,
AccuBioTech Co. Ltd.
to manufacturers’
serum or plasma
Test Cassette
AllTest Biotech Hangzhou
AccuBioTech Co.Rapid Test Cassette
IgG/IgM Rapid Test
Rapid Test
Aytu Bioscience
Rapid Tes
COVID-19 IgM-IgG
BioMedomics, Inc
Dual Antibody
BIOMAXIMA S.A.
Rapid Test
Rapid Test Cassette
Cellex Inc.
Changsha Sinocare Inc.
IgG / IgM
Test Cassette
Aytu BioscienceAllTest Biotech
BIOMAXIMA S.A.
Cellex qSARS-CoV-2
IgG/IgM Cassette
Rapid Test
SARS-CoV-2 Antibody
Test Strip
95.0% Whole blood
(Colloidal Gold Method)
Sample size
10 µL of serum
or plasma
IgM 96% 10 μL of whole
of fingertip
serum or
or whole blood
10 μL of serum
orof serum
plasma or plasma
µL of whole blood
blood or whole blood
10–20 µL whole blood,
5 μL of serum or
serum or plasma
10 μL of whole blood
10–20 µL whole blood,
serum or plasma
blood, serum or
IgG IgM
10 µL whole blood,
serum or plasma
99.2% Whole blood
10 µL of whole blood,
serum or plasma
CTK Biotech
OnSite COVID-19
IgG/IgM Rapid Tes
10–15 µL of serum
or plasma
Edinburgh Genetics Limited
Watmind 2019 nCoV
novel coronavirus
detection reagent
10 µL of serum or
plasma; 20 µL of
fingertip blood or
whole blood
Getein Biotech, Inc.
One Step Test for
Novel Coronavirus
IgM/IgG Antibody
10 µL of serum
or plasma;
20 µL of fingertip
blood or whole blood
Goldsite Diagnostics Inc.
SARS-CoV-2 IgG/IgM
30 µL of whole blood
Hangzhou Biotest Biotech
COVID-19 IgG/IgM
Rapid Test Cassette
10 µL of whole blood,
serum or plasma
Hunan Lituo Biotechnology
COVID-19 IgG/IgM
Detection Kit
InTec Products, Inc.
Rapid SARS-CoV-2
Antibody Test IgG or
Ig Mor IgG/IgM
10 µL of sample
Liming Bio-Products Co., Ltd.
COVID-19 IgG/IgM
Combo Rapid
Test Device
10 µL of serum
or plasma;
20 µL of whole blood
Sample Size
Livzon Diagnostic
Diagnostic Kit for
IgM/IgG Antibody to
10 µL of serum or
plasma; 20 µL of
whole blood
nal von minden GmbH
NADAL® COVID-19
IgG/IgM Test
10 µL of whole blood,
serum or plasma
Nanjing Vazyme Medical Tech.
Detection Kit
20 µL of whole blood,
serum or plasma
PRIMA Lab S.A.
PRIMA COVID-19
IgG/IgM Rapid Test
(For Professional Use)
10 µL of serum or
plasma; 20 µL of
fingertip blood or
whole blood
Sugentech, Inc
SGTi-flex COVID-19
10 µL whole blood
Sensing Self,
COVID-19 Rapid
IgG/IgM combined
Antibody assay
IgM 92% IgG 100%
20 µL of fingertip
blood or whole blood
Xiamen AmonMed Biotechnology
COVID-19 IgM/IgG
test kit
Coris BioConcept
COVID-19 Ag
RapiGEN, Inc.
COVID-19 Ag
SD BIOSENSOR,
STANDARD Q
COVID-19 Ag Test
VivaChek Laboratories,
COVID-19 IgM/IgG
Rapid Test
IgM and IgG: 97.1%
10 µL of whole blood,
serum or plasma
Qingdao Hightop Biotech
SARS-CoV-2 IgM/IgG
Antibody Rapid Test
10 µL of serum or
20 µL of whole blood
Wuhan Coronavirus
Rapid Test (2019-nCoV,
COVID-19) IgG/IgM
5 µL of serum or
10 µL of whole blood
In serological IVD, the so-called ‘window period’ is of much importance—that is, the time when
the production of antibodies is initiated, but their level is still low, and thus test results may prove
negative. Anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies appear quite late, i.e., a few days after clinical manifestations,
which is why serological tests cannot be used as a basic tool in diagnosing SARS-CoV-2 infections [32].
The detection of specific anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies is possible about 10 days after the first clinical
manifestations of infection. Thus, this serves the purpose of confirming contact with coronavirus,
and is of enormous importance from an epidemiological perspective, as it allows us to detect subjects
who had the infection but were asymptomatic or oligosymptomatic, and could have been the source
of infection for other people (“silent” carriers/vectors). It also allows us to determine the spread
Test Type
Proteome Microarray
AccuBioTech Co. Ltd.
Accu-Tell COVID-19 IgG/IgM Rapid Test Cassette
BIOMAXIMA S.A.
2019-nCoV IgG/IgM Rapid Test Cassette
BioMedomics, Inc
COVID-19 IgM-IgG Dual Antibody Rapid Test
CE-IVD; India
Cellex Inc.
Cellex qSARS-CoV-2 IgG/IgM Cassette Rapid Test
CE-IVD; USA; Australia; Brazil
Changsha Sinocare Inc.
SARS-CoV-2 Antibody Test Strip (Colloidal Gold Method)
Edinburgh Genetics Limited
Watmind 2019 nCoV novel coronavirus antibody detection reagent
Getein Biotech, Inc.
One Step Test for Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) IgM/IgG Antibody
Goldsite Diagnostics Inc.
SARS-CoV-2 IgG/IgM Kit
Hunan Lituo Biotechnology
COVID-19 IgG/IgM Detection Kit
Innovita Biological Technology
2019-nCoV Ab Test (Colloidal Gold) IgM/IgG
CE-IVD; China, Brazil
IgG or IgM or both
Whole blood/serum/plasma
InTec Products, Inc.
Rapid SARS-CoV-2 Antibody Test IgG or Ig Mor IgG/IgM
Liming Bio-Products Co., Ltd.
COVID-19 IgG/IgM Combo Rapid Test Device
nal von minden GmbH
NADAL® COVID-19 IgG/IgM Test
PRIMA Lab S.A.
PRIMA COVID-19 IgG/IgM Rapid Test (For Professional Use)
Dynamiker Biotechnology (Tianjin) Co., Ltd.
2019 nCOV IgG/IgM Rapid Test
Coris BioConcept
COVID-19 Ag Respi-Strip
RapiGEN, Inc.
BIOCREDIT COVID-19 Ag
SD BIOSENSOR, Inc.
STANDARD Q COVID-19 Ag Test
DRG International, Inc.
COVID-19 lgG, EIA-6146
Epitope Diagnostics, Inc.
EDI™ Novel Coronavirus COVID-19 IgG ELISA Kit
EUROIMMUN AG
Anti-SARS-CoV-2 ELISA (IgG)
DRG International, Inc.
COVID-19 lgM, EIA-6147
Epitope Diagnostics, Inc.
EDI™ Novel Coronavirus COVID-19 IgM ELISA Kit
EUROIMMUN AG
Anti-SARS-CoV-2 ELISA (IgA)
SD BIOSENSOR, Inc.
STANDARD F COVID-19 Ag FIA
Shenzhen Bioeasy Biotechnology Co., Ltd.
Bioeasy 2019-nCoV Ag Fluorescence Rapid Test Kit
Mokobio Biotechnology R&D Center
PEPperPRINT GmbH
CE-IVD, Brasil
CE-IVD; Brazil; USA
CE-IVD; Brazil
CE-IVD, Brasil
Nasopharyngeal swab
SARS-CoV-2 IgM & IgG Quantum Dot Immunoassay
serum, plasma, whole blood
PEPperCHIP® SARS-CoV-2 Proteome Microarray (manual)
3.3. Protein Microarray Method (PMM)
The protein microarray method (PMM) is a proteomic screening technique serving the purpose
of simultaneous/parallel quantitative and qualitative analysis of mixtures containing many proteins.
The chip used is composed of a supporting surface (e.g., modified glass plate, nitrocellulose membrane,
or microtitration plate), on which the matrix of ‘capturing’ proteins is immobilized in accordance with
the determined formula, performing the function of a probe. The material captured may be antibodies,
enzymes, or ligands. Protein analyte, added to the matrix, may be modified by means of various
types of markers (among others: radioisotopes, fluorescence, luminescence markers). The interaction
equipment. The advantages of protein micromatrices include the short time required for analysis,
modest consumption of samples and reagents, high sensitivity, automation of testing. They allow us to
investigate the functions and effects of proteins on large scale [33,34].
The newly developed PEPperCHIP® SARS-CoV-2 Proteome Microarray (PEPperPRINT) based
on the SARS-CoV-2 genome derived from the virus isolate Wuhan-Hu-1 (GenBank ID: MN908947.3)
enables us to serologically screen about 5000 individual peptides spanning the whole viral
proteome. Sequences of ORF1ab protein, surface glycoprotein, ORF3a protein, coat protein,
membrane glycoprotein, ORF6 protein, ORF7a protein, ORF8 protein, nucleocapsid phosphoprotein,
and ORF10 protein have been elongated and connected by means of neutral GSGSGSG connectors.
The elongated protein sequences have been transcribed into 4883 different peptides composed of
15 amino acids printed in two repetitions (9766 peptide sites) in order to obtain high-resolution epitope
data. In the case of SARS-CoV, which emerged in 2002, it was demonstrated that the application of PMM
is characterized by enhanced sensitivity, as more Chinese subjects were diagnosed as SARS-positive
when applying PMM in comparison with ELISA tests. The PMM seems to be more reliable, as it
allows us to determine more protein antigens of the virus [35]. An additional advantage of such tests
is the possibility of automating the entire analytical process. Unfortunately, the method has several
imperfections, including the repeatability of the test itself, while the cost of the testing and equipment
used for micromatrix diagnostics is significant, which makes the PMM method less accessible in
standard laboratory settings [36].
Undoubtedly, the scalable and reliable POCTs used in the community and outside laboratories
would have the opportunity to reduce the time to obtain COVID-19 diagnostic results and might
support early implementation of isolation resources and infection control measures. From a medical
workforce point of view, antibody- and antigen-detecting tests appear to have a significant role in
identifying healthcare workers who recovered from SARS-CoV-2 infection, to assess their suitability to
provide frontline health services. On the other hand, the false negative serology tests could cause spread
of COVID-19, unjustified reassurance and a change in public behavior. Undoubtedly, the negative
results of serology tests (swabs) should not be treated as definitive for ‘ruling out’, but a positive test
results are beneficial to ‘rule in’ coronavirus infection. The sufficient accuracy of serology tests used
more widely will allow us to make an appropriate decision regarding lifting restrictions on a national
level. Nevertheless, the wider implementation of POCD will ultimately support public health strategies
about the potential lifting of social distancing restrictions in future [30]. Moreover, with the limited
data available at present, for antibody-detecting and antigen-detecting rapid POCD, further intense
research into their potential diagnostic utility is highly encouraged. If these tests demonstrate adequate
accuracy, it is likely that they could potentially be used as triage tests for quick identification of patients
who are suspected of contracting COVID-19, reducing the need for expensive reference molecular PCR
testing [4,6]. Finally, it is worth noting the psychological and behavioral consequences of correctly
established and known immunity status within the community.
4. The Currently Developing Concepts of COVID-19 Diagnostics
4.1. Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR/Cas13) Technology
Recently, a test has been developed based on Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic
Repeats (CRISPR/Cas12a), with visual readouts. The test can detect 10 copies of the virus gene in
merely 45 min, providing simple and reliable diagnostic method, which additionally demonstrates
high sensitivity and specificity. In order to enable fast diagnosis at the hospital or on admission, the test
be split off by the Cas12a protein, when the nucleic acid of SARS-CoV-2 is found in the detection system.
In this way, a green signal of fluorescence will be obtained, visible with the naked eye, in‘the light,
with a wavelength of 485 nm. The high specificity of the test was obtained by designing 15 crRNAs,
which may distinguish the polymorphisms of a single nucleotide with other viruses related to SARS in
four domains: ORF1a or ORF1b, N, and E genes [37].
4.2. Exhaled Breath Condensate (EBC)
The search for new diagnostic methods is continued. Because SARS-CoV-2 is spread by droplets,
while the diagnostic sensitivity and specificity index for RT-qPCR tests is the highest for broncho-alveolar
lavage (BAL) (higher than for sputum or nose/throat swabs), scientists recently proposed the use of
exhaled breath condensate (EBC) for diagnostic purposes. EBC is most similar in its biochemical
composition and origin to BAL. Examinations with the use of EBC are a relatively novel diagnostic
method, used mainly to assess inflammation within the respiratory tract, and its components reflect
the composition of the fluid lining the bronchi and alveoli. EBC is a condensed form of small droplets
of the fluid lining the lungs, which is usually exhaled, it contains various components, from small ions
to proteins and organelles; it may even contain viruses, fungi, and bacteria. Taking samples of the
condensate is safe, totally non-invasive, easy to perform, it may be repeated many times, it may also be
performed on patients with severe complications of COVID-19; its enormous advantage is that in may
be performed in small children, with the use of special facial masks. The course of the examination is
such that the patient is requested to exhale, when breathing uneventfully for some 10-15 min, to an
apparatus provided with a cooling system, which allows us to accumulate the condensate in which
SARS-CoV-2 may be detected. The application of this method seems justified from a public health
perspective. The false positive results that are presently obtained contribute the continued spread of
the virus worldwide [38,39].
The optimization of laboratory diagnostics is the most dynamically developing field in the time of
the COVID-19 pandemic, supporting contemporary medicine, government decisions and healthcare
strategies. The efforts of scientist–clinician teams focus, first of all, upon implementing the most reliable
diagnostic tools; however, because COVID-19 is a new nosological entity, there are not enough data as
of yet that would enable the determination of standards for the interpretation of serological POCTs.
As with any other infectious diseases, the diagnostic value of a test is not only about the method
of collecting the material, the quality of the sample and the equipment applied. Equally essential
procedure (storage and handling) prior to analysis, from the moment of collecting the biological
material to the assaying stage.
Funding: This study received no external funding.
Lau, S.K.P.; Woo, P.C.Y.; Yip, C.C.Y.; Tse, H.; Tsoi, H.; Cheng, V.C.C.; Lee, P.; Tang, B.S.F.; Cheung, C.H.Y.;
Lee, R.A.; et al. Coronavirus HKU1 and Other Coronavirus Infections in Hong Kong. J. Clin. Microbiol. 2006,
44, 2063–2071. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
World Health Organization. Advice on the Use of Point-Of-Care Immunodiagnostic Tests for COVID-19.
Corman, V.; Bleicker, T.; Brünink, S.; Drosten, C.; Landt, O.; Koopmans, M.; Zambon, M. Diagnostic Detection of
Lu, X.; Chen, Y.; Bai, B.; Hu, H.; Tao, L.; Yang, J.; Chen, J.; Chen, Z.; Hu, Z.; Wang, H. Immune responses against
122, 496–502. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Liu, W.; Liu, L.; Kou, G.; Zheng, Y.; Ding, Y.; Ni, W.; Wang, Q.; Tan, L.; Wu, W.; Tang, S.; et al. Evaluation
of Nucleocapsid and Spike Protein-based ELISAs for detecting antibodies against SARS-CoV-2. J. Clin.
Microbiol. 2020, 58, e00461-20. [CrossRef]
Corman, V.M.; Landt, O.; Kaiser, M.; Molenkamp, R.; Meijer, A.; Chu, D.K.W.; Bleicker, T.; Brünink, S.;
Schneider, J.; Schmidt, M.L.; et al. Detection of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) by real-time RT-PCR.
Eurosurveillance 2020, 25, 2000045. [CrossRef]
Vashist, S.K. In Vitro Diagnostic Assays for COVID-19: Recent Advances and Emerging Trends.
Diagnostics 2020, 10, 202. [CrossRef]
Shereen, M.A.; Khan, S.; Kazmi, A.; Bashir, N.; Siddique, R. COVID-19 infection: Origin, transmission,
and characteristics of human coronaviruses. J. Adv. Res. 2020, 24, 91–98. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
(accessed on 13 June 2020).
Deepak, S.A.; Kottapalli, K.R.; Rakwal, R.; Oros, G.; Rangappa, K.S.; Iwahashi, H.; Masuo, Y.; Agrawal, G.K.
Real-Time PCR: Revolutionizing Detection and Expression Analysis of Genes. Curr. Genom. 2007, 8, 234–251.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
vivalytic-tests/vri-multiplex-test/ (accessed on 9 May 2020).
Huang, W.E.; Lim, B.; Hsu, C.C.; Xiong, D.; Wu, W.; Yu, Y.; Jia, H.; Wang, Y.; Zeng, Y.; Ji, M.; et al. RT-LAMP for
rapid diagnosis of coronavirus SARS-CoV-2. Microb. Biotechnol. 2020, 13, 950–961. [CrossRef]
Cui, Z.; Chang, H.; Wang, H.; Lim, B.; Hsu, C.C.; Yu, Y.; Jia, H.; Wang, Y.; Zeng, Y.; Ji, M.; et al. Development of
a rapid test kit for SARS-CoV-2: An example of product design. Biodes. Manuf. 2020, 1–4. [CrossRef]
Moran, A.; Beavis, K.G.; Matushek, S.M.; Ciaglia, C.; Francois, N.; Tesic, V.; Love, N. The Detection of
SARS-CoV-2 using the Cepheid Xpert Xpress SARS-CoV-2 and Roche cobas SARS-CoV-2 Assays. J. Clin.
Microbiol. 2020. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Watson, J.; Whiting, P.F.; Brush, J.E. Interpreting a covid-19 test result. BMJ 2020, 369, m1808. [PubMed]
West, C.P.; Montori, V.M.; Sampathkumar, P. COVID-19 Testing: TheThreat of False-Negative Results.
Mayo Clin. Proc. 2020. [CrossRef]
Lippi, G.; Salvagno, G.L.; Pegoraro, M.; Militello, V.; Caloi, C.; Peretti, A.; Gaino, S.; Bassi, A.; Bovo, C.;
Lo Cascio, G. Assessment of immune response to SARS-CoV-2 with fully automated MAGLUMI 2019-nCoV
IgG and IgM chemiluminescence immunoassays. Clin. Chem. Lab. Med. 2020. [CrossRef]
Hsueh, P.R.; Huang, L.M.; Chen, P.J.; Kao, C.L.; Yang, P.C. Chronological evolution of IgM, IgA, IgG and
neutralisation antibodies after infection with SARS-associated coronavirus. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 2004, 10,
Guan, M.; Chen, H.Y.; Foo, S.Y.; Tan, Y.J.; Goh, P.Y.; Wee, S.H. Recombinant protein-based enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay and immunochromatographic tests for detection of immunoglobulin G antibodies to
severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus in SARS patients. Clin. Diagnost. Lab. Immunol. 2004,
Kogaki, H.; Uchida, Y.; Fujii, N.; Kurano, Y.; Miyake, K.; Kido, Y.; Kariwa, H.; Takashima, I.; Tamashiro, H.;
Ling, A.-E.; et al. Novel rapid immunochromatographic test based on an enzyme immunoassay for detecting
nucleocapsid antigen in SARS-associated coronavirus. J. Clin. Lab. Anal. 2005, 19, 150–159. [CrossRef]
Koczula, K.M.; Gallotta, A. Lateral flow assays. Essays Biochem. 2016, 60, 111–120.
Oh, J.-S.; Ha, G.-W.; Cho, Y.-S.; Kim, M.J.; An, D.J.; Hwang, K.K.; Lim, Y.K.; Park, B.K.; Kang, B.; Song, D.S.
One Step Immunochromatography Assay Kit for Detecting Antibodies to Canine Parvovirus. Clin. Vaccine
Immunol. 2006, 13, 520–524. [CrossRef]
Posthuma-Trumpie, G.A.; Korf, J.; van Amerongen, A. Lateral flow (immuno)assay: Its strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities and threats. A literature survey. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2009, 393, 569–582. [CrossRef]
Stürenburg, E.; Junker, R. Point-of-care testing in microbiology: The advantages and disadvantages of
immunochromatographic test strips. Dtsch. Arztebl. Int. 2009, 106, 48–54. [PubMed]
Li, Z.; Yi, Y.; Luo, X.; Xiong, N.; Liu, Y.; Li, S.; Sun, R.; Wang, Y.; Hu, B.; Chen, W.; et al. Development and
clinical application of a rapid IgM-IgG combined antibody test for SARS-CoV-2 infection diagnosis. J. Med.
Virol. 2020. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
covid19serology/ (accessed on 13 June 2020).
Lauer, S.A.; Grantz, K.H.; Bi, Q.; Jones, F.K.; Zheng, Q.; Meredith, H.R.; Azman, A.S.; Reich, N.G.; Lessler, J.
The Incubation Period of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) From Publicly Reported Confirmed Cases:
Estimation and Application. Ann. Intern. Med. 2020. [CrossRef]
Melton, L. Protein arrays: Proteomics in multiplex. Nature 2004, 429, 101–107. [CrossRef]
Hall, D.A.; Ptacek, J.; Snyder, M. Protein microarray technology. Mech. Ageing. Dev. 2007, 128, 161–167.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Zhu, H.; Hu, S.; Jona, G.; Zhu, X.; Kreiswirth, N.; Willey, B.M.; Mazzulli, T.; Liu, G.; Song, Q.; Chen, P.; et al.
Severe acute respiratory syndrome diagnostics using a coronavirus protein microarray. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 2006, 103, 4011–4016. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Molecular and Antibody Point-Of-Care Tests to Support the Screening, Diagnosis and Monitoring of
Wang, X.; Zhong, M.; Liu, Y.; Ma, P.; Dang, L.; Meng, Q.; Wan, W.; Ma, X.; Liu, J.; Yang, G.; et al. Rapid
and Sensitive Detection of COVID-19 Using CRISPR/Cas12a-based Detection with Naked Eye Readout,
CRISPR/Cas12a-NER. Sci. Bull. (Beijing) 2020. [CrossRef]
Khoubnasabjafari, M.; Jouyban-Gharamaleki, V.; Ghanbari, R.; Jouyban, A. Exhaled breath condensate as a
potential specimen for diagnosing COVID-19. Bioanalysis 2020. [CrossRef]
Jerzyńska, J.; Brzozowska, A.; Bobrowska-Korzeniowska, M.; Grzelewski, T.; Stelmach, I. Usefulness of
exhaled breath condensate for evaluation of markers of airway inflammation in children with asthma.
Pediatr. Pol. 2009, 84, 437–445. [CrossRef]
