Eurasian J Med 2020; 52(2): 191-6
Aycan Yuksel1 , Dilek Karadogan2 , Canan Gunduz Gurkan3 , Fatma Tokgoz Akyil4 , Zehra Nur Toreyin5 ,
Feride Marim6 , Huseyin Arikan7 , Tugba Sismanlar Eyuboglu8 , Nagehan Emiralioglu9 , Irem Serifoglu10 ,
Elif Develi11 , Selman Celik12 , Umran Ozden Sertcelik13 , Tugba Ramasli Gursoy8 , Mehmet Fatih Elversli14 ,
Asli Oncel13 , Berrin Er15 , Ali Firincioglulari16 , Fatma Esra Gunaydin17 , Hilal Ozakinci18 , Neslihan Ozcelik2 ,
Dorina Esendagli19 , Asena Aydin20 , Neslihan Kose21 , Merve Ercelik22 , Pinar Yildiz Gulhan22 , Ethem Yildiz23 ,
Ilim Irmak13 , Bilge Yilmaz Kara2 , Selcuk Gurz24 , Fatma Gulsum Karakas25 , Metin Akgun26
To know what you know and what you do not know, that is true knowledge
Eurasian J Med 2020; 52(2): 191-6.
Department of Chest Diseases, Recep Tayyip
Department of Chest Diseases, Sureyyapasa
Chest Diseases and Thoracic Surgery Training and
Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey
Department of Chest Diseases, Yedikule Chest
Diseases and Thoracic Surgery Training and
Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey
Department of Occupational Health and
Diseases, Adana City Research and Training
Hospital, Adana, Turkey
Department of Chest Diseases, Kutahya
Kutahya, Turkey
Center, Internal Medicine Intensive Care Unit,
Van, Turkey
Department of Pediatric Pulmonology, Gazi
Department of Pediatric Pulmonology, Hacettepe
Department of Chest Diseases Kirikhan State
Hospital, Hatay, Turkey
Department of Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation,
Istanbul, Turkey
Department of Nursing and Health Services,
Istanbul, Turkey
Department of Chest Diseases, Hacettepe
Department of Chest Diseases, Unye State
Hospital, Ordu, Turkey
Scientists from all over the world have been intensively working to discover different aspects of Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) since the first cluster of cases was reported in China. Herein, we aimed to
investigate unclear issues related to transmission and pathogenesis of disease as well as accuracy of diagnostic
the asymptomatic phase of infection, and viral load was suggested to be a useful marker to assess disease
severity. In contrast to immune response against viral infections, cytotoxic T lymphocytes decline in SARSCoV-2 infection, which can be partially explained by direct invasion of T lymphocytes or apoptosis activated
by SARS-CoV-2. Dysregulation of the urokinase pathway, cleavage of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein by FXa
and FIIa, and consumption coagulopathy were the proposed mechanisms of the coagulation dysfunction in
COVID-19. False-negative rates of reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction varied between 3% and
41% across studies. The probability of the positive test was proposed to decrease with the number of days
past from symptom onset. Safety issues related to infection spread limit the use of high flow nasal oxygen
(HFNO) and continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) in hypoxic patients. Further studies are required
to elucidate the challenging issues, thus enhancing the management of COVID-19 patients.
Keywords: Coronavirus, pathogenesis, transmission, venous thromboembolism
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is an infectious disease mostly effects the lungs caused
by a novel betacoronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, which was first described in December 2019, in China,
and was later declared as the cause of a pandemic. Despite the similarity of the genetic sequencing of the novel coronavirus with the SARS virus, the management of this unknown disease with
non-specific manifestations is still very challenging for the physicians [1]. Patients with COVID-19
present with a variety of incubation period as well as clinical course of the disease. COVID19 pneumonia may lead to shock and multiple organ failure. In most cases, respiratory failure
accounts for the actual cause of death. The estimated global mortality rate is approximately 2%,
but it varies according to age [1]. It is important to define the severity of the disease since severe
patients experience worse outcomes. Although scientists from all over the world have been
trying to unravel the complexity of COVID-19, yet much remains to be learned in regards to
pathogenesis of the disease, accuracy of diagnostic tests and treatment modalities. The present
of Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) search terms “Coronavirus”, “Coronavirus Infections”,
192 • Yuksel et al. The Unknowns of COVID-19
Eurasian J Med 2020; 52(2): 191-6
‘’Novel coronavirus pneumonia”, ‘’COVID’’,
Acute Respiratory Syndrome”, “SARS-CoV-2”.
Reference lists of the studies were also checked
through to find more studies that are pertinent
than English were excluded.
Pathogenesis of COVID-19 infection remains
unclear, a variety of potential pathogenic
mechanisms including coagulopathy, thrombotic
microangiopathy restricted to lungs, endothelial
dysfunction, excessive release of pro-inflammatory cytokines are being investigated. The
endothelial dysfunction caused by infection activates an excessive thrombin generation and
inhibits fibrinolysis, which indicates hypercoagulability [2]. For instance, lung dissection of a
deceased patient with COVID-19 pneumonia
showed blockage and establishment of small
thrombosis in pulmonary microvasculature [3].
Coagulopathy and thrombotic microangiopathy
will be discussed in detail below in subsection of
‘Coagulation dysfunction and venous thromboembolism in patients with COVID-19’.
Internal Medicine Intensive Care Unit, Hacettepe
Health Sciences, Ankara Ataturk Chest Diseases and
Thoracic Surgery Training and Research Hospital,
Ankara, Turkey
Department of Allergy and Immunology, Uludag
Department of Chest Diseases, Kestel State
Hospital, Bursa, Turkey
Department of Chest Diseases, Bilecik State
Hospital, Bilecik, Turkey
Department of Chest Diseases, Bingol State
Hopital, Bingöl, Turkey
Department of Thoracic Surgery, Ondokuz Mayis
Department of Chest Diseases, Istanbul
Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey
Correspondence to: Dilek Karadogan
SARS-CoV-2 enters target cells with the spike
(S) protein engaging angiotensin converting
enzyme-2 (ACE2) receptor [4]. The virus will
proliferate and cause destruction of the tissues which have high ACE2 expression including lungs, intestines, kidneys when protective
immune response is impaired. The major-histocompatibility-complex antigen loci (HLA) seem
to be responsible for predisposition to infections. For instance, some murine MHC class II
haplotypes are related to predisposition with
influenza. HLA-A*11, HLA-B*35, and HLADRB1*10 make males vulnerable to H1N1 [5].
During the incubation and early phase of the
disease, a specific adaptive immune response
may stop SARS-CoV-2 and prevent worsening
[6]. The cellular immunity, T lymphocytes are
major players in virus clearance after viral infections. Lymphopenia is one of the most prominent characteristics of COVID-19 [7,8,9], and
might be explained by the impaired innate and
adaptive immune responses. In contrast to the
immune response against viral infections, cytotoxic T lymphocytes decline sharply in SARSCoV-2 infection [10]. A study demonstrated
that reduction of CD3+, CD4+ and CD8+
T lymphocytes were related to the course
of COVID-19 pneumonia, especially in severe
cases [11]. The mechanism of the reduction
of T lymphocytes may be a result of the direct
assault of SARS-COV-2 or induction of apoptosis by SARCoV-2 like MERS-CoV [12]. In addi-
tion, SARS-CoV-2 may modify role of antigen
presenting cells, dendritic cells, and cytokines
(TNF-alfa and IL-4) which regulate the function
of T lymphocytes [13,14]. The immune status
differs significantly between severe and nonsevere COVID-19 patients [15]. The reduction
of T-Cells correlates with disease severity. May
here lies the answer of the question of why
some patients experience severe disease, while
the others show mild symptoms. The complement system is a crucial piece of host defence
against infections, has potent pro-inflammatory
properties and can aggravate lung injury, and
may play a part in COVID-19 pneumonia.
Complement activation in the pathogenesis
of SARS had been shown before [16], and a
recent study revealed that complement C3
was remarkably elevated in serious cases of
COVID-19 pneumonia than that in non-serious
cases [11].
The cytokine release syndrome (CRS) may play
a major role in patients with severe COVID-19
as in ARDS. Pro-inflammatory cytokines that
drive progression of the disease including IL2,
IL6, IL7, IL10, GCSF, IP10, MCP1, MIP1α, and
TNFα are reported high in severe COVID-19
patients especially requiring the intensive care
unit (ICU) [7]. The pathological characteristics
of COVID-19 related ARDS are diffuse alveolar damage with hyaline membrane formation
with fibrin deposition and a few multinucleated
enlarged cells [17]. A robust immune response
and epithelial regeneration is essential for recovery and may lead aberrant wound healing which
can cause more severe fibrosis than other
causes of ARDS. The function of hyaluronic acid
(HA) is insufficient in patients with influenza,
therefore, COVID-19 related ARDS has been
thought to be associated with HA [18].
Chen et al. [19] demonstrated that the hemoglobin decreases, whereas serum ferritin, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein
(CRP), and lactate dehydrogenase increase significantly in most COVID-19 cases. A molecular
study reported genomic structures of the virus
interferes with the heme on the 1-beta chain
of hemoglobin to seperate the iron as a result
forming porphyrin [20]. This inhibits normal
metabolic pathway of heme, and cause hemoglobin carry less oxygen. Alveolocapillary units
have become inable to transfer carbon dioxide
and oxygen.
Coagulation Dysfunction and Venous
Thromboembolism in Patients with COVID-19
As clinicians we have to identify the variables
that drive mortality early. Considering current
data, we have to focus on three important
Yuksel et al. The Unknowns of COVID-19
Eurasian J Med 2020; 52(2): 191-6
points: older age, increased value of D-dimer
(>1μg/ml), and presence of co-morbidities [21].
The role of coagulopathy in COVID-19 needs
to be clarified. In a previous study, it was
suggested that impairment of the urokinase
pathway promotes to lung involvement whereas plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 defends
against SARS [22]. Moreover, Beri et al. revealed
that fibrinolysis activated by plasminogen aggravates inflammation caused by influenza [23].
Abnormal coagulation results are associated
with poor prognosis. Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is common in deceased
COVID-19 patients. In a study, D-dimer, fibrin/
fibrinogen degradation products (FDP) and
fibrinogen levels were higher in patients with
COVID-19 than those in healthy controls, while
antithrombin level was lower [24]. In addition, levels of D-dimer and FDP in cases with
severe COVID-19 were higher than cases with
mild disease. A study compared the coagulation parameters between patients with severe
pneumonia caused by SARS-CoV2 and nonSARS-CoV2, and also evaluated whether cases
with high levels of D-dimer could benefit from
anticoagulants [25]. The 28-day mortality was
approximately twice fold higher in patients with
COVID-19 compared to non-COVID cases.
COVID-19 cases had higher platelet counts.
The 28-day mortality in COVID-19 patients
with D-dimer >3.0 μg/mL, who received anticoagulants were lower than who did not receive
and cases with high levels of D-dimer could
benefit from anticoagulants. A study from
China demonstrated that D-dimer and FDP
levels, prothrombin time and activated partial
thromboplastin time are significantly higher in
deceased patients with COVİD-19 compared to
survivors; and 71.4% of non-survivors met the
criteria of DIC whereas only 0.6% of survivors
did [25].
Development of consumption coagulopathy,
especially DIC, may worsen the clinical course
in patients with COVID-19. DIC is not so rare
in patients with severe SARS-Cov-2 infection,
and the rate of DIC in deceased patients was
reported 71.4 [26]. Monitoring of coagulation
parameters may help to predict deterioration
of the disease and establish an accurate therapeutic strategy. Severe COVID-19 can progress
to sepsis which also a common cause of DIC,
through inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6,
IL-8, TNF-α.
Prevalence of venous thromboembolism (VTE)
in patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection remains
unclear. The incidence of VTE in patients with
severe COVID-19 who were admitted to ICUs
was found to be 25% in a retrospective study
analyzing ultrasound of lower extremity vein
[27]. Antiphospholipid antibodies are detected
in high titers in antiphospholipid syndrome;
however, they can also appear temporarily in
critical patients. Zhang et al. [28] described
three patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection who
had coagulation dysregulation and antiphospholipid antibodies, including anticardiolipin IgA,
anti-β2- glycoprotein I IgA, and IgG antibodies,
and also intracerebral infarcts.
A post-mortem study reported COVID-19
associated cardiopulmonary changes as follows
[29]: The main pulmonary arteries were free of
thromboemboli; hyaline membranes consistent
with diffuse alveolar damage with mild-to-moderate lymphocytic infiltrates (CD4 immunostain
pozitive); fibrin thrombi and megakaryocytes
in capillaries and small vessels; cardiomegaly,
and right ventricular dilatation. There are nor
thrombus in coronary arteries neither lymphocytic infiltrate in myocard suggestive of viral
myocarditis. The dominant processes seem to
be diffuse alveolar damage, CD4+ mononuclear cell infiltration around occluded small vessels
by microthrombi, and pulmonary hemorrhage.
Thrombotic microangiopathy is considered
restricted to the lungs.
Coagulopathy becomes more prominent on the
seventh day of viremia. One theory suggests
that anticoagulants could block SARS-CoV-2
replication through inhibiting cleavage of the S
protein by FXa and FIIa. Low molecular weight
heparins (LMWHs) are suggested in treatment
of hospitalized adult patients with COVID-19.
The International Society on Thrombosis and
Haemostasis (ISTH) recently recommended
that all hospitalized COVID-19 patients, even
those not in the ICU, should receive standard
prophylactic anticoagulation with LMWH in the
absence of any contraindications. Early application of anticoagulants is being advocated for better disease course in severe COVID-19, however, it remains unclear whether we should use
specific inclusion or exclusion criteria. ISTH has
defined a new and earlier phase of sepsis-associated DIC, called “sepsis-induced coagulopathy”
(SIC) [30]. Preliminary data from Wuhan suggest that anticoagulation may be beneficial in
severe COVID-19 cases with D-dimer levels >6
times the upper limit of normal [31]. On contrary, Harvard Brigham and Women’s Hospital
guidance suggests initiating prophylactic anticoagulation therapy for all patients with COVID19 in absence of any contraindications. Oral
anticoagulants should be switched to LMWH
or unfractionated heparin. However, whether
anticoagulants are only useful in patients meeting SIC criteria or with markedly elevated
D-dimer but not in unselected patients remains
to be unclear. A small case series suggested
that dipyridamole could be used, although anticoagulant and antiplatelet agents need further
investigation for their therapeutic activities [32].
Viral Transmission
SARS-CoV-2 cause rapid spread [33, 34], even
among asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic
carriers [35, 36]. A study reported that mean
nasopharyngeal swab viral load of severe cases
was 60-fold higher than that of mild cases, which
suggests that the higher the viral load the more
severe the disease [37]. Viral negative conversion seems to occur early in mild cases, a study
revealed that 90% of mild group have negative
RT-PCR results after 10 days whereas all severe
cases yet tested positive over day 10 [37].
Asymptomatic transmission of SARS-CoV-2
may cause challenges for disease control.
Presymptomatic transmission can happen
through formation of respiratory droplets or
indirect transmission. Vocal activities including
speech, laughing, singing have been showed
Environmental contamination with SARS-CoV-2
can occur via droplet dispersion or touching
with an infected person’s contaminated hands
[39]. Duration of contagiuous phase while a
patient is presymptomatic is still unknown. A
study demonstrated that 1-3 days prior to
initiation of symptoms, presymptomatic spread
exposure occurred [40].
Tranmission and viability of SARS and influenza
on surfaces were shown to decrease at higher
temperatures. Regard to this, higher temperatures were proposed to may have a protecting
impact towards SARS-CoV-2 infection. In a
study, it was found that an increase in temperature from 1°C to 9°C, and from 10°C to 19°C
was associated with a decrease in case numbers
from 24 to 19, and from 18 to 7, respectively
[41]. Contrarily, results of another report did
not favour the postulation that elevated temperature and UV radiation can decrease the
spread of COVID-19 [42]. It was proposed
that difference in mortality of SARS-CoV-2
infection among countries could be elucidated
by Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccination
status. 55 high income countries with current
BCG policy had 0.78±0.40 deaths per million
people; contrarily, countries that never had a
BCG policy including Italy, Netherlands, Belgium,
USA, Lebanon had a higher mortality rate, with
16.39±7.33 deaths per million people [43].
Besides, it is unknown whether BCG vaccination
at old age would boost defenses in elderly.
194 • Yuksel et al. The Unknowns of COVID-19
Accuracy of Diagnostic Tests
Test designs vary whether the test detects
infection directly (such as the virus itself) or
indirectly (such as host antibodies). Countries
have used different testing approaches depending on their testing capacities. Current casefatality rate ranges from 0.6% to 7.2% by region
[44-46]. In a couple countries, nation-wide
utilization of diagnostic testing became a mainstay of effective confinement approaches. For
example, in Germany and South Korea, the
case-fatality rates are less than 0.5%, probably
because extensive testing revealed a large group
of mild cases [47]. Nucleic acid amplification
time of symptom onset when viral shedding
and transmission risk is highest [48]. Real-time
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) based assay on respiratory specimens
performed in laboratory is the reference standard test for COVID-19 diagnosis. Detection of
host-derived antibodies directed against SARSCoV-2 are crucial for surveillance, determination of SARS-CoV-2 immunity, and potentially
for risk assessment of health care workers. The
utility of antibody detection assays for diagnosing acute infections is probably limited around
the time of symptom onset [48]. Serologic
assays might be useful in scenarios in which
patients present with late complications of disease, and RT-PCR is false negative due to reduction in viral shedding over time. The Center for
Disease Control (CDC) currently recommends
priority for testing three groups: hospitalized
patients with presentations compatible with
COVID-19, other symptomatic persons at risk
for poor outcomes, and persons who had
close contact with someone with suspected or
confirmed COVID-19 within 14 days of illness
onset [49]. The CDC does not recommend
testing asymptomatic persons.
A nasopharyngeal specimen is the preferred
choice for swab-based testing, but samples
taken from sputum, endotracheal aspirates, and
bronchoalveolar lavage have greater sensitivity
than upper respiratory tract specimens [50].
Inadequate sample collection may result false
negative. A study identified that the likelihood
of a positive RT-PCR test reduces with time following initiation of symptoms, and nasal swabs
are better at diagnostic yield than throat swabs
[51]. Previous studies have reported rates
of false-negative RT-PCR results at symptom
onset between 3-41% [52, 53]. Initial sensitivity of RT-PCR to identify SARS-CoV-2 infected
patients was found approximately 71% in two
different studies [54, 55]. Meanwhile positive
test rates were found to be lower for throat
samples in comparison with nasal samples (24%
Eurasian J Med 2020; 52(2): 191-6
vs. 57% respectively) [56]. Likelihood of positivity reduces with time past after initiation of
symptoms; the chance of a positive test with
nasal swab declines from 94.39% on day 0 to
67.15% by day 10, and there is only a 2.38%
chance of a positive test by day 31, (positive rates for throat swabs: 88%, 47.11%, and
1.05% for day 0, 10 and 31 respectively) [51].
Guidelines from the WHO and the European
Centre for Disease Control noted that a sole
negative result is inadequate to exclude disease.
After a patient has had a positive test result,
various experts have advised getting minimum
2 negative upper respiratory tract samples,
obtained at periods of 24 hours or longer, to
document SARS-CoV-2 clearance [57, 58].
Compared with serial nasopharyngeal sampling,
chest computed tomography (CT) may be
more sensitive than an RT-PCR test at a single
time point for the diagnosis of COVID-19 [5254]. However, CT findings are not completely
specific to COVID-19 and do not exclude a coinfection or an alternative diagnosis [59].
Clinical Course
COVID-19 can be divided into three different
clinical stages [60]: Asymptomatic stage (First
1-2 days): SARS-CoV-2 enters upper airways
and binds to epithelial cells. There is local
propagation of the virus despite a limited innate
immune response. Individuals can spread infection and virus can be detected in the upper
airways at this stage. Conducting airway immune
response (Next few days): The virus moves
down through airways, innate immune response
is triggered, and the disease clinically manifest.
Approximately 80% of the cases, the disease is
restricted to this stage and clinical course will be
mild. Respiratory failure and progression to ARDS:
About 20% of the patients will progress to stage
3. The virus reaches the gas exchange units of
the lung and develop pulmonary infiltrates.
SARS-CoV-2 exhibited neurotropic features,
cases with COVID-19 may have neurological
manifestations comprising headache, altered
consciousness, and paresthesia [61]. In addition, increasing numbers of cases present with
anosmia [62]. SARS-CoV-2 was detected in
the brain or cerebrospinal fluid [63]. Neuronal
degeneration and intracranial edema was shown
in autopsies [64]. Neurologic involvement of
coronaviruses manifests in three categories:
Viral encephalitis, infectious toxic encephalopathy, and acute cerebrovascular disease [65]. The
mechanism of neuroinvasion is still unknown.
Possible pathways are proposed: 1. Direct infection injury, 2. Hypoxia injury, 3. Immune injury,
4. ACE2 related injury.
Use of Noninvasive Mechanical Ventilation
HFNO can be used in COVID-19 patients, but
infection spread is a real concern in this method.
Spread of virus may reduce with putting-on a
surgical mask above high flow nasal cannula.
CPAP must be first choice of non-invasive ventilation for COVID-19 patients with hypoxemic
respiratory failure. CPAP response must be
assessed within half an hour, and unless it is adequate, early intubation and invasive mechanical
ventilation (IMV) should be applied. CPAP must
be continued if clinical findings of the patient are
improving, and a trial of weaning CPAP should
be considered when oxygen concentration
<40% [66]. The peripheral oxygen saturation
(SpO2) monitoring is generally sufficient [66].
Arterial blood gas monitoring is not necessary
unless PaCO2 is elevated at presentation. Target
level of SpO2 is 92-96%, and for patients with
chronic type II respiratory failure is 88-92% [66].
Bilevel NIV (BiPAP) should be considered for
clinical deteriorating patients despite adequate
CPAP support or for patients with hypercapnic
respiratory failure.
Location of NIV treatment is an important
issue in COVID-19 pandemic to be able to protect the healthcare workers (HCWs) because
of the high spread rate of the disease. It is
recommended that NIV is delivered in a negative pressure room with air exchanges greater
than 10 cycles per hour in order to avoid
virus spread and to protect HCWs. However,
if a negative pressure room is not available
because of insufficient number of ICU beds,
respiratory intermediate units with opportunity of air exchange (big windows that can be
opened periodically making possible to change
air at least at a rate of 160L/h) are suggested
to deliver respiratory support to entire patients
[67]. First recommended interface for NIV is
a full-face non-vented mask with expiratory
viral filter; after that a helmet preferably with
air cushion, a standard face mask must be last
choice. A viral/bacterial filter should be placed
in the circuit between the mask and the oxygen
and exhalation ports and should be changed
every 24 hours. An external humidifier should
be avoided. Contamination risk of HCWs during NIV is supposed to be low when staff
is equipped with proper personal protective
equipments which are a FFP3 respirator, double
non-sterile gloves, long-sleeved water-resistant
gown, goggles or face shield.
Anecdotal observations in field have noted that
patients with COVID-19-related respiratory
failure respond well to prone positioning with
NIV, especially in those who had posterior subplevral dominant opacities in their lung CT. The
Yuksel et al. The Unknowns of COVID-19
Eurasian J Med 2020; 52(2): 191-6
care should be taken to avoid ventilator disconnections during proning and the number of
staff should be minimalized for turning. Optimal
timing and criteria for prone ventilation with
NIV is unclear and should be performed on an
individualized basis.
Use of Steroids, Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory Drugs, and Vitamin C
Current WHO recommendations advise against
routine use of prednisolone in the management
of COVID-19 [1]. Corticosteroids have shown to
be failed against respiratory tract viruses including
MERS, SARS, and influenza in various studies, and
have serious adverse effects including psychosis,
diabetes, avascular necrosis. Corticosteroid which
can repress cell-mediated immunity, stimulate the
reduction of T lymphocyte, and postpone the
virus clearance [68], may worsen the defective
function of lymphocytes in patients with SARSCoV-2. However, a retrospective study reported
that application of steroids was attributed to
decreased mortality in patients with COVID-19
associated ARDS [69]. Hence, the use of corticosteroids should be careful in severe patients with
COVID-19 pneumonia, and the time of corticosteroid prescription merit additional investigation.
Although the use of NSAIDs in COVID-19 has
also been a controversial issue, it was clarified
by WHO that avoiding NSAIDs was not recommended since it was not associated with worse
prognosis as previously claimed [1].
Vitamin C has been suggested as a therapeutic
option for COVID-19 based on a prospective
randomized trial of intravenous vitamin C in
patients with sepsis and ARDS [70]. In that trial,
there was no difference in the sequential organ
failure assessment (SOFA) score and 28-day
mortality between the vitamin C and placebo
groups. There is no evidence to support use of
vitamin C in patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection, however there is an ongoing clinical trial for
high-dose vitamin C in China (NCT04264533).
Despite significant progresses achieved globally
in the struggle with the COVID-19 pandemic;
there are still many conflicting and unclear
issues particularly regarding pathogenesis, clinical course, diagnosis and treatment strategies.
Further studies are required to elucidate these
challenging issues, thus to enhance the management of COVID-19 patients.
- A.Y., D.K.; Supervision - A.Y., D.K., M.A.; Resources A.Y., F.T.A., F.M.; Materials - A.Y., D.K., C.G.G., Z.N.T.,
I.S.; Data Collection and/or Processing - A.Y., D.K.,
T.S.E., N.E., E.D., S.C., U.O.S., T.R.G., M.F.E., A.O., B.E.,
A.F., F.E.G., H.O., N.O., D.E., A.A., N.K., M.E., P.Y.G., E.Y.,
I.I., B.Y.K., S.G.; Analysis and/or Interpretation - A.Y.,
D.K.; Literature Search - A.Y., D.K., C.G.G., Z.N.T., I.S.,
T.S.E., N.E., E.D., S.C., U.O.S., T.R.G., M.F.E., A.O., B.E.,
A.F., F.E.G., H.O., N.O., D.E., A.A., N.K., M.E., P.Y.G., E.Y.,
Acknowledgements: This study was supported by
Turkish Thoracic Society (TTS) and is a product of
the collaboration of TTS Early Career Members
Taskforce Group.
interest to declare.
study has received no financial support.
WHO- Clinical management of severe acute
respiratory infection (SARI) when COVID-19
disease is suspected: Interim guidance. Available
2. Gupta N, Zhao YY, Evans CE. The stimulation of
thrombosis by hypoxia. Thromb Res 2019; 181:
3. Luo W, Yu H, Gou J, et al. Clinical Pathology of
Critical Patient with Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia (COVID-19). Preprints 2020; 2020020407.
4. Wrapp D, Wang N, Corbett KS, et al. Cryo-EM
structure of the 2019-nCoV spike in the prefusion conformation. Science 2020; 367: 1260-3.
5. Dutta M, Dutta P, Medhi S, Borkakoty B, Biswas
D. Polymorphism of HLA class I and class II alleles in influenza A (H1N1)pdm09 virus infected
population of Assam, Northeast India. J Med Virol 2018; 90: 854-60. [Crossref]
6. Shi Y, Wang Y, Shao C, et al. Cell Death Differ.
COVID-19 infection: the perspectives on immune responses. Cell Death Differ 2020; 27:
7. Guan W, Ni Z, Hu Y et al. Clinical Characteristics
of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in China. N Engl J
Med 2020; 382: 1708-20. [Crossref]
8. Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, et al. Clinical features
of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus
in Wuhan, China. Lancet 2020; 395: 497-506.
9. Wang D, Hu B, Hu C, et al. Clinical Characteristics
of 138 Hospitalized Patients With 2019 Novel
Coronavirus-Infected Pneumonia in Wuhan, China. JAMA 2020; 323: 1061-9. [Crossref]
10. Qin C, Zhou L, Hu Z, et al. Dysregulation of
immune response in patients with COVID-19
11. He R, Lu Z, Zhang L, et al. The clinical course
and its correlated immune status in COVID-19
pneumonia. J Clin Virol 2020; 127: 104361.
12. Chu H, Zhou J, Wong BH-Y, et al. Middle East
Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Efficiently
Infects Human Primary T Lymphocytes and Activates the Extrinsic and Intrinsic Apoptosis Pathways. J Infect Dis 2015; 213: 904-14. [Crossref]
13. Yoshikawa T, Hill T, Li K, Peters CJ, Tseng C-TK.
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS)
Coronavirus-Induced Lung Epithelial Cytokines
Exacerbate SARS Pathogenesis by Modulating
Intrinsic Functions of Monocyte-Derived Macrophages and Dendritic Cells. J Virol 2009; 83:
14. Zhao J, Zhao J, Van Rooijen N, Perlman S. Evasion by Stealth: Inefficient Immune Activation
Underlies Poor T Cell Response and Severe
Disease in SARS-CoV-Infected Mice. Gale M, ed.
PLoS Pathog 2009; 5: e1000636. [Crossref]
15. Khanahmad H, Kouhpayeh S, Rahimmanes I.
The conceptual framework for SARS-CoV-2
16. Gralinski LE, Sheahan TP, Morrison TE, et al. Complement Activation Contributes to Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Pathogenesis.
mBio 2018; 9: e01753-18. [Crossref]
17. Xu Z, Shi L, Wang Y, et al. Pathological findings
of COVID-19 associated with acute respiratory
distress syndrome. Lancet Respir Med 2020; 8:
18. Bell TJ, Brand OJ, Morgan DJ, et al. Defective lung
function following influenza virus is due to prolonged, reversible hyaluronan synthesis. Matrix
Biol 2018; 80: 14-28. [Crossref]
19. Chen N, Zhou M, Dong X et al. Epidemiological
and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019
novel coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China:
a descriptive study. Lancet 2020; 395: 507-13.
20. Wenzhong L, Hualan L. COVID-19: Attacks the
1-Beta Chain of Hemoglobin and Captures the
Porphyrin to Inhibit Human Heme Metabolism.
21. Zhou F, Yu T, Du R, et al. Clinical course and risk
factors for mortality of adult inpatients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort
study. Lancet 2020; 395: 1054-62. [Crossref]
22. Gralinski LE, Bankhead A 3rd, Jeng S, et al. Mechanisms of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus-induced acute lung injury. mBio
2013; 4: e00271-e313. [Crossref]
23. Berri F, Rimmelzwaan GF, Hanss M, et al. Plasminogen controls inflammation and pathogenesis of influenza virus infections via fibrinolysis.
PLoS Pathog 2013; 9: e1003229. [Crossref]
24. Hana H, Yanga L, Liu R, et al. Prominent changes
25. Yin S, Huang M, Li D, Tang N. Difference of coagulation features between severe pneumonia
induced by SARS-CoV2 and non-SARS-CoV2. J
Thromb Thrombolysis 2020; 1-4. [Crossref]
26. Tang N, Li D, Wang X, Sun Z. Abnormal coagulation parameters are associated with poor
prognosis in patients with novel coronavirus
196 • Yuksel et al. The Unknowns of COVID-19
pneumonia. J Thromb Haemost 2020; 18: 844-7.
Cui S, Chen S, Lİ X, Liu S, Wang F. Prevalence
of venous thromboembolism in patients with
severe novel coronavirus pneumonia. J Thromb
Zhang T, Xiao M, Zhang S, et al. Coagulopathy
and Antiphospholipid Antibodies in Patients
with Covid-19. N Engl J Med 2020; 382: e38.
Fox SE, Akmatbekov A, Harbert JL, Li G, Brown
JQ, Vander Heide RS. Pulmonary and Cardiac
Iba T, Levy JH, Warkentin TE, et al. Diagnosis and
management of sepsis-induced coagulopathy and
disseminated intravascular coagulation. J Thromb
Haemost 2019; 17: 1989-94. [Crossref]
Tang N, Bai H, Chen X, Gong J, Li D, Sun Z. Anticoagulant treatment is associated with decreased
mortality in severe coronavirus disease 2019
patients with coagulopathy. J Thromb Haemost
Liu X, Li Z, Liu S et al. Therapeutic effects of
Li Q, Guan X, Wu P, et al. Early transmission dynamics in Wuhan, China, of novel coronavirusinfected pneumonia. N Engl J Med 2020; 382:
Mizumoto K, Kagaya K, Chowell G. Early epidemiological assessment of the transmission potential
and virulence of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Wuhan City: China, January-February,
Bai Y, Yao L, Wei T, et al. Presumed asymptomatic
carrier transmission of COVID-19. JAMA 2020;
Li R, Pei S, Chen B, et al. Substantial undocumented infection facilitates the rapid dissemination of novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV2). Science
Liu EY, Yan L, Wan L, et al. Viral dynamics in mild
and severe cases of COVID-19. Lancet Infect Dis
Asadi S, Wexler AS, Cappa CD, Barreda S, Bouvier NM, Ristenpart WD. Aerosol emission and
superemission during human speech increase with
voice loudness. Sci Rep 2019; 9: 2348. [Crossref]
Ong SWX, Tan YK, Chia PY, et al. Air, surface environmental, and personal protective equipment contamination by severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) from a symptomatic
patient. JAMA 2020; 23: 1610-2. [Crossref]
Wei WE, Li Z, Chiew CJ, Yong SE, Toh MP, Lee
VJ. Presymptomatic Transmission of SARSCoV-2 - Singapore, January 23-March 16, 2020.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2020; 69: 4115. [Crossref]
Bannister-Tyrrell M, Meyer A, Faverjon C, et al.
Preliminary evidence that higher temperatures
are associated with lower incidence of COVID-19,
Eurasian J Med 2020; 52(2): 191-6
for cases reported globally up to 29th February
Yao Y, Pan J, Liu Z, et al. No Association of COVID-19 transmission with temperature or UV
radiation in Chinese cities. Eur Respir J 2020; 55:
Miller A, Reandelar MJ, Fasciglione K, et al. Correlation between universal BCG vaccination
policy and reduced morbidity and mortality for
COVID-19: an epidemiological study. medRxiv
Onder G, Rezza G, Brusaferro S. Case-fatality
Wilson N, Kvalsvig A, Barnard LT, et al. Casefatality risk estimates for COVID-19 calculated
by using a lag time for fatality. Emerg Infect Dis
Dong E, Du H, Gardner L. An interactive webbased dashboard to track COVID-19 in real
time [Letter]. Lancet Infect Dis 2020; 20: 533-4.
Cheng MP, Papenburg J, Desjardins M, et al. Diagnostic Testing for Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome-Related Coronavirus-2: A Narrative
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Evaluating and Testing Persons for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). Available from:
Wang W, Xu Y, Gao R, et al. Detection of SARSCoV-2 in different types of clinical specimens.
JAMA 2020; 323: 1843-4. [Crossref]
Wikramaratna P, Paton RS , Ghafari M, Lourenço J. Estimating false-negative detection rate of
Xie X, Zhong Z, Zhao W, Zheng C, Wang F, Liu
J. Chest CT for Typical 2019-nCoV Pneumonia:
Relationship to Negative RT-PCR Testing. Radiology 2020; 200343. [Crossref]
Ai T, Yang Z, Hou H, et al. Correlation of Chest
CT and RT-PCR Testing in Coronavirus Disease
2019 (COVID-19) in China: A Report of 1014
Cases. Radiology 2020; 200642. [Crossref]
Fang Y, Zhang H, Xie J, et al. Sensitivity of Chest
CT for COVID-19: Comparison to RT-PCR. Radiology 2020; 200432. [Crossref]
Luo L, Liu D, Liao XL, et al. Modes of contact and risk of transmission in COVID-19
Yang Y, Yang M, Shen C, et al. Evaluating the accuracy of different respiratory specimens in the
laboratory diagnosis and monitoring the viral
shedding of 2019-nCoV infections. medRxiv
57. European Centre for Disease Prevention and
pdf on 4 April 2020.
58. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Discontinuation of Transmission-Based Precautions and
Disposition of Patients with COVID-19 in Healthcare Settings (Interim Guidance). Available from:
59. Wu X, Cai Y, Huang X, et al. Co-infection with
SARS-CoV-2 and influenza A virus in patient
with pneumonia, China. Emerg Infect Dis 2020;
60. Wu Z, McGoogan JM. Characteristics of and Important Lessons From the Coronavirus Disease
2019 (COVID-19) Outbreak in China: Summary of
a Report of 72314 Cases From the Chinese Center
for Disease Control and Prevention. JAMA 2020;
61. Mao L, Wang MD, Chen SH, et al. Neurological manifestations of hospitalized patients with
62. Giacomelli A, Pezzati L, Conti F, et al. Self-reported Olfactory and Taste Disorders in SARSCoV-2 Patients: A Cross-Sectional Study. Clin
Infect Dis 2020; ciaa330.
63. Xiang P, Xu XM, Gao LL, et al. First case of 2019
novel coronavirus disease with Encephalitis. ChinaXiv T202003, 00015.
64. Xu Z, Shi L, Wang Y, et al. Pathological findings
of COVID-19 associated with acute respiratory
distress syndrome. Lancet Respir Med 2020; 8:
65. Wu Y, Xu X, Chen Z, et al. Nervous system involvement after infection with COVID-19 and
other coronaviruses. Brain Behav Immun 2020;
S0889-1591(20)30357-3. [Crossref]
66. Guidance for the role and use of non-invasive
respiratory support in adult patients with COVID-19 (confirmed or suspected) 6 April 2020,
67. Vitacca M, Nava S, Santus P, et al. Early consensus management for non-ICU ARF SARS-CoV-2
emergency in Italy: from ward to trenches. Eur
Respir J 2020; 55: 2000632. [Crossref]
68. Cain DW, Cidlowski JA. Immune regulation by
69. Wu C, Chen X, Cai Y, et al. Risk Factors Associated With Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome
and Death in Patients With Coronavirus Disease
2019 Pneumonia in Wuhan, China. JAMA Intern
Med 2020; e200994. [Crossref]
70. Fowler AA, Truwit JD, Hite RD, et al. Effect of
Vitamin C Infusion on Organ Failure and Biomarkers of Inflammation and Vascular Injury in
Patients With Sepsis and Severe Acute Respiratory Failure. The CITRIS-ALI Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2019; 322: 1261-70. [Crossref]
