COMUNICAÇÃO BREVE
BRIEF COMMUNICATION
Caring in the age of COVID-19: lessons from
science and society
Cuidar em tempos da COVID-19: lições aprendidas
entre a ciência e a sociedade
Cuidar en tiempos del COVID-19: lecciones
aprendidas entre la ciencia y la sociedad
Claudia Teresa Vieira de Souza 1
Clarice Silva de Santana 1
Patrícia Ferreira 2
João Arriscado Nunes 2
Maria de Lourdes Benamor Teixeira 1
Maria Isabel Fragoso da Silveira Gouvêa 1
This paper focuses on our research and intervention in health promotion
with patients and communities affected by various infectious diseases, in the
Foundation, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, and promotes the continuing involvement
of health researchers and professionals in the collaborative production of knowledge on health with patients and community groups and in their training
as community health promoters. The new epidemic scenario created the demand for a space of dialogue and knowledge-sharing on the prevention of
COVID-19 transmission. Due to the interruption of regular activities in the
Knowledge-Sharing Platform, a strategy was launched to serve as a link
between science and society and help overcome the social isolation imposed by
the COVID-19 pandemic. The WhatsApp group allowed project members to
participate by addressing questions (audio) on COVID-19 through mediation
by community group leaders. The main questions by participants related to
risk factors, transmission, immunity to the novel coronavirus, care related to
prevention, symptoms, and treatment; and COVID-19 and influenza vaccine.
The educational material Caring in the Age of COVID-19 was produced
and shared with community leaders and distributed to the respective groups
and was eventually shared in their communities as a response to a demand for
knowledge that responds to the concerns of people already exposed to structural vulnerability.
C. T. V. Souza
Fundação Oswaldo Cruz.
Av. Brasil 4365, Rio de Janeiro, RJ 21040-900, Brasil.
Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil.
Centro de Estudos Sociais, Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra,
Citizen Participation in Science and Technology; Health Promotion; Social
Isolation; COVID-19
any medium, without restrictions, as long as the original work is correctly
Cad. Saúde Pública 2020; 36(6):e00115020
Souza CTV et al.
In keeping with international guidelines, the preventive measures recommended by the Brazilian
Ministry of Health to minimize COVID-19 transmission in places with community transmission
include social distancing 1,2.
Given the exposure to the risk of contagion and the incapacity to access preventive measures
involving other health problems, which can thus be aggravated, situations of structural vulnerability 3
may be expanded in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. It is thus important to act on the links
between scientific knowledge related to prevention of transmission in the more vulnerable communities and the continuity of promotion of their quality of life. Aspects involving health literacy and the
basic sanitation, running water, and healthcare in poor communities, thus require urgent attention,
integrated into the promotion of relations between individual and community care to confront this
epidemic’s challenges.
The project Knowledge-Sharing Platform: Community Involvement and Participation in Innovative
Practices in Health Promotion and Knowledge Production has been developed since 2012 by the Research
Laboratory in Epidemiology and Social Determination of Health (LAP-EPIDSS) at the National
The project seeks to build new practices in health promotion and forms of collaborative knowledge
production involving epidemiologists, social scientists, infectious disease experts, other health professionals, patients, and members of community groups, developing public-interest health actions,
allowing active participation by society, especially in the control of infectious diseases (e.g., HIV infection, Chagas disease, etc.), chronic and degenerative diseases (e.g., neoplasms), and other health and
health-related problems that impact the population’s quality of life. The principal activities involve
educational talks on topics of interest to the participants, visits to scientific installations, incomegeneration workshops, and extension courses focused on relations between science and society in
teaching, research, and clinical care settings.
The social partners of the Knowledge-Sharing Platform include the Association of Friends of the INI
Struggling for Life (ALCA-INI), which provides support for patients receiving treatment for infectious diseases at the INI and their families, the “Amigas da Mama” Club (CAM), a group of women living with or who have lived with breast cancer and that encourages a support network for confronting
the disease; and the Community Advisory Committee of the Clinical Research Center in HIV/AIDS
of the Nova Iguaçu General Hospital (CCA-HGNI), which provides an interface between researchers
and the community in HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment. These three groups participate actively
in publicizing the project’s activities.
The project’s participants are already living in situations of structural vulnerability 3, aggravated
by social exclusion, difficulties in access to healthcare for surveillance and control of other health
problems, and daily struggles against health inequalities and which the collective activities promoted by the project seek to support. Most of the participants see their vulnerability exacerbated by
COVID-19, since they have other infectious diseases and/or chronic noncommunicable diseases.
Within the project’s activities, the community groups demand access to scientific knowledge
related to situations and processes that can seriously affect or contribute to the exacerbation of their
health condition and that of the people living and in contact with them. This community action
fosters involvement by the project’s researchers with experiences pursuing better health conditions
based on horizontal relations and focused on the community’s concerns and problems related to
health and quality of life. In this context, both the community groups and researchers informally grasp
the role of “community health promoters”.
The most recent community demand has been for knowledge on COVID-19, given the participants’ concern over the circulation of fake news. To respond to this demand, we organized a chat
circle entitled Contributions by Community Health Promoters to the Prevention and Control of COVID-19,
scheduled for March 19, 2020, with participation by epidemiologists, infectious disease experts, and
specialists in hospital infection, aimed at involving the community in the shared construction of
knowledge on the pandemic.
Cad. Saúde Pública 2020; 36(6):e00115020
CARING IN THE AGE OF COVID-19
the implementation of measures during the public health emergency of international concern resulting from COVID-19, including social isolation in the state of Rio de Janeiro as a way of decreasing
community transmission 4, made cancellation of the event unavoidable due to the concern with distancing and isolation of the project’s participants.
The project’s focus on individuals that are already vulnerable due to the undervaluation of their
experiences and knowledge led us to create a space for action and response to situations of illness and
vulnerability and demands for various forms of care during the epidemic 5. Given the social isolation, the relations of trust and care built through health promotion activities motivated us to adopt
WhatsApp as a communications tool for collectively dealing with the challenges, keeping the project’s
activities alive, now in a virtual environment.
The current paper aims to share and present the building of this space for dialogue and exchange
of experiences for building knowledge on COVID-19 in a virtual environment already familiar to the
participants in the project’s scope and/or in their personal relations.
The paper reports on the experience with a health activity based on the collective construction of an
educational tool to contribute to the prevention and management of COVID-19.
We have attempted to value the shared questions, responding with the group to the new challenges. We adopted WhatsApp as the platform for participatory construction, aimed at promoting
individual empowerment, collective participation by the project’s stakeholders, and community
engagement based on the use of participatory methodologies 6,7,8.
The WhatsApp group called Caring to Avoid COVID-19 aimed to develop the activity with the
LAP-EPIDSS team and 3 community groups (ALCA-INI, CAM, and CCA-HGNI) as mediators
between the project and the groups’ members. We chose this app since it is the virtual media most
widely used by these social groups to communicate with their members.
We defined leaders as people that participate in and are dedicated to their community groups,
inspiring trust and offering individualized attention and care and seeking solutions with their community members. A proposal was thus presented to the 4 community leaders (LGC in portuguese)
project participants to collectively develop educational materials on COVID-19, with WhatsApp as
the platform. Since the community groups represented by their LGC have a WhatsApp group, the
proposal was for them to share the following question with their groups’ participants: “What information on the new coronavirus do you consider important to share with the community?”.
The survey ran from March 23 to 26, 2020. We included in the WhatsApp group a message with
the proposal’s underlying question and an audio to explain the activity’s proposal to the LGC participants in the Knowledge-Sharing Platform, as a way to promote access and understanding for everyone
The WhatsApp group Caring to Avoid COVID-19 was created on March 23, 2020. It consists of 5 members from the Knowledge-Sharing Platform team and 4 LGC from community groups that participate
directly in the project’s activities. Two leaders from ALCA-INI also participated. Everyone agreed to
participate and confirmed that the initiative was a way to feel that they belonged and were valued in
the process of producing and sharing knowledge on COVID-19.
The participants’ main questions involved risk factors, transmission, immunity to the new virus,
care related to prevention, symptoms, and treatment, and COVID-19 and influenza vaccine.
Cad. Saúde Pública 2020; 36(6):e00115020
Souza CTV et al.
After compiling the questions raised by each group’s participants, the team prepared the answers
based on the websites of the World Health Organization, U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Brazilian Society of Infectious Diseases, and Ministry of Health.
Since it was urgent to provide feedback, the consolidation and layout of the material Caring in the
Age of COVID-19 were shared with the LGC from the participating community groups. Following
revision and evaluation by the LGC, especially concerning the content, language, and display, the
material was approved and distributed by the leaders to their respective community groups, totaling
approximately 100 people who had access to it. Some LGC also shared the material in other states of
Brazil (Pernambuco, Bahia, Espírito Santo, and São Paulo). Members of the project team also asked
to share the material in their work groups (health and teaching institutions), in addition to groups of
We believe that the material reached more people than initially estimated, which has been a common experience in the project. The material was deposited in the Institutional Repository of the
The Knowledge-Sharing Platform has a long track record of action-based research focused on collaborative knowledge production in clinical, epidemiological, and social research in infectious diseases and
in the creation of innovative health promotion. The platform is also a space to join and build relations
of trust and care through health promotion activities.
Social distancing and isolation are necessary measures, but they concern us because isolation and
social exclusion are a central part of the structural vulnerability 3 affecting the participants (and their
communities). Based on dialogue and exchange of experiences in a virtual setting, we thus built this
strategy to overcome the distancing between the project’s participants and support the demands for
knowledge on dealing with COVID-19.
The initiative had not been planned initially in the activities of the Knowledge-Sharing Platform,
but it emerged as a response to the need for an immediate intervention due to the characteristics of
The WhatsApp group Caring to Avoid COVID-19 served as a space for dialogue and knowledgesharing in COVID-19 prevention, mobilizing all the stakeholders in this participatory process. As we
hoped, the individual reports shared through the project’s solidarity network have allowed attenuating the social isolation experienced by many participants and have continued to strengthen the relations as a form of care. The Knowledge-Sharing Platform views caring as kind of relationship and an
ethnical stance in research and intervention that highlight the relevance of attitudes and moral values,
affective relations, and our responsibility to involvement, understanding, and respect for vulnerable
individuals and communities 9,10.
The new view of care problematizes and seeks to contribute to social transformation of health
professionals’ role 11 and all the participants’ relations through new experiences with caring for other
under exceptional conditions.
Dialogue, creativity, and attentive listening to participants’ demands for promoting this form of
care, which expresses the way health is viewed by the project, is inherent to planning the proposed
activities. This experience reconfirms our view that health promotion requires mutual promotion of
caring with empowerment and well-being. The production of such care contributes to the survival
and flourishing of caregivers and those receiving the care and to the acknowledgement of interdependence as a condition for life with dignity.
Given the urgent need for new forms of intervention in the COVID-19 epidemic, we believe
that this experience can expand the scope of future public health measures based on scientific commitment to the struggles for health by these communities and the communities’ strengthening that
results from this involvement. This strength is expressed in the solidarity of the community health
promoters, working to control transmission of the disease in their communities, but also as a lesson
and a process in the production of new forms of knowledge and skills, expanded in their experience
and dialogue with health researchers and professionals 12,13.
Cad. Saúde Pública 2020; 36(6):e00115020
CARING IN THE AGE OF COVID-19
We conclude that the complex social and political dimensions of the COVID-19 pandemic must be
addressed as part of this expanded construction of health promotion and public health.
We intend to continue this experience as a space for dialogue and construction of knowledge and
care, based on prevention and health promotion, since it represents our ethical position and commitment to those experiencing this epidemic.
This brief paper also serves to reflect on a view of the new processes of social determination of
health and the production of new knowledge resulting from the interface between scientific knowledge and knowledge born from experience during a health emergency.
C. T. V. Souza, C. S. Santana, and P. Ferreira contributed to the study’s conception and design, data
collection, analysis, and interpretation, drafting and
relevant critical revision of the intellectual content,
and approval of the final version, guaranteeing its
accuracy and integrity. J. A. Nunes, M. L. B. Teixeira, and M. I. F. S. Gouvêa contributed to the data
collection, analysis, and interpretation, drafting and
relevant critical revision of the intellectual content,
and approval of the final version, guaranteeing its
accuracy and integrity.
the study, Marcos Maurício Braga Cardozo, Valdinei
da Silva, Joelma Araújo Tavares Ali, Juciara Nicomedio, and the other participants in the project Knowledge-Sharing Platform, as well as the project’s team
members, José Liporage Teixeira (pharmacist) and
Aline Fabrícia Santos da Silva Bistene, Ana Carolina de Freitas Guimarães, and Karina Diniz Pinto
Additional informations
(0000-0002-6896-0089); Maria Isabel Fragoso da
Silveira Gouvêa (0000-0002-1772-1942).
Cad. Saúde Pública 2020; 36(6):e00115020
Souza CTV et al.
Secretaria de Atenção Primária à Saúde, Ministério da Saúde. Protocolo de manejo clínico
virus-2019 (accessed on 29/Apr/2020).
Bourgois P, Holmes SM, Sue K, Quesada J.
Strutural vulnerability: operationalizing the
concept to adress health disparities in clinical
care. Acad Med 2017; 3:299-307.
Rio de Janeiro. Decreto no 46.973, de 16 de
março de 2020. Reconhece a situação de emergência na saúde pública do Estado do Rio de
Janeiro em razão do contágio e adota medidas
de enfrentamento da propagação decorrente
do novo coronavírus (COVID-19); e dá outras
providências. Diário Oficial do Estado do Rio
de Janeiro 2020; 17 mar.
Ferreira P, Souza CTV, Santana CS, Nunes
JA. Caring in times of COVID-19. Somatosphere: Science, Medicine, and Anthropology
Lima ICV, Galvão MTG, Pedrosa SC, Cunha
GH, Costa AKB. Uso do aplicativo Whatsapp
no acompanhamento em saúde de pessoas com
HIV: uma análise temática. Esc Anna Nery Rev
Cad. Saúde Pública 2020; 36(6):e00115020
Silva RC. Metodologias participativas para trabalhos de promoção de saúde e cidadania. São
Paulo: Vetor; 2002.
Queiroz AG, Couto ACP. Metodologia participativa, subjetividade individual e social: facilitação de reuniões de moradores em Residências Terapêuticas. Pesqui Prát Psicossociais
Waldow VR. Cuidar: expressão humanizadora
Waldow VR. Enfermagem: a prática do cuidado sob o ponto de vista filosófico. Investigación en Enfermería: Imagen y Desarrollo 2015;
Barros S, Oliveira MAF, Silva ALA. Práticas
Enferm USP 2007; 41(Esp):815-9.
Lima FA, Galimbertti PA. Sentidos da participação social na saúde para lideranças comunitárias e profissionais da Estratégia Saúde da
Família do território de Vila União, em Sobral
– CE. Physis (Rio J.) 2016; 26:157-75.
Santos BS. O fim do império cognitivo. Belo
CARING IN THE AGE OF COVID-19
Esta comunicação é centrada na nossa pesquisa e
intervenção em promoção da saúde com pacientes
e comunidades afetadas por diversas doenças infecciosas, no projeto Plataforma de Saberes. Esse projeto é desenvolvido no Instituto Nacional de
Infectologia Evandro Chagas, Fundação Oswaldo
Cruz, no Rio de Janeiro, Brasil, e promove o envolvimento continuado de pesquisadores e profissionais de saúde na produção colaborativa de conhecimento sobre saúde com pacientes e grupos comunitários, e na sua capacitação como promotores
de saúde comunitária. Face ao novo cenário epidêmico, surgiu a demanda de um espaço de diálogo e partilha de conhecimento sobre prevenção da
transmissão da COVID-19. Devido à interrupção
das atividades regulares do Plataforma de Saberes, foi promovida uma estratégia que servisse de
elo integrador entre ciência e sociedade e ajudasse
a superar o isolamento social imposto pela pandemia da COVID-19. O grupo de WhatsApp possibilitou aos integrantes do projeto participarem por
meio de formulação de perguntas (áudio) sobre a
COVID-19, por intermédio da mediação dos líderes de grupos comunitários. Os principais questionamentos dos participantes estão relacionados com
fatores de risco; formas de transmissão; imunidade
ao novo vírus; cuidados relacionados à prevenção,
sintomas e tratamento; COVID-19 e vacina da
influenza. O material educativo Cuidar em tempos da COVID-19 foi produzido e compartilhado
com os líderes comunitários e disponibilizado aos
respectivos grupos, e veio a ser disseminado nas
suas comunidades como resposta a uma demanda de conhecimento que responde às preocupações
vividas pelos que já se encontram em situação de
vulnerabilidade estrutural.
Esta comunicación se centra en nuestra investigación e intervención en la promoción de la salud
con pacientes y comunidades afectadas por diversas enfermedades infecciosas, en el proyecto Plataforma de Saberes. Este proyecto está desarrollado en el Instituto Nacional de Infectología Evandro Chagas/Fundación Oswaldo Cruz, en Río de
Janeiro, Brasil, y promueve la implicación continuada de investigadores y profesionales de salud
en la producción colaborativa de conocimiento
sobre salud con pacientes y grupos comunitarios,
y en su capacitación como promotores de salud
comunitaria. Frente al nuevo escenario epidémico, surgió la demanda de un espacio de diálogo e
intercambio de conocimiento sobre la prevención
de la transmisión de la COVID-19. Debido a la
interrupción de las actividades regulares de la Plataforma de Saberes, se promovió una estrategia
que sirviese de vínculo integrador entre ciencia y
sociedad y ayudase a superar el aislamiento social impuesto por la pandemia de la COVID-19.
El grupo de WhatsApp posibilitó a los integrantes
del proyecto, que participaran mediante la formulación de preguntas (audio) sobre la COVID-19,
a través de la mediación de los líderes de grupos
comunitarios. Los principales cuestionamientos de
los participantes se relacionaron con factores de
riesgo; formas de transmisión; inmunidad ante el
nuevo virus; cuidados relacionados con la prevención, síntomas y tratamiento; COVID-19 y vacuna de la gripe. El material educativo Cuidar em
tempos da COVID-19 se produjo y se compartió
con los líderes comunitarios y fue puesto a disposición de los respectivos grupos, así como difundido
en sus comunidades, en respuesta a una demanda
de conocimiento que responde a las preocupaciones
vividas por los que ya se encuentran en situación
de vulnerabilidad estructural.
Participação Cidadã em Ciência e Tecnologia;
Promoção da Saúde; Isolamento Social;
Participación Ciudadana en Ciencia y
Tecnología; Promoción de la Salud; Aislamiento
Social; COVID-19
Submitted on 07/May/2020
Final version resubmitted on 17/May/2020
Approved on 26/May/2020
Cad. Saúde Pública 2020; 36(6):e00115020
