Immune Response, Inflammation,
and the Clinical Spectrum of
Luis F. García*
Grupo de Inmunología Celular e Inmunogenética, Facultad de Medicina, Sede de Investigación Universitaria, Universidad de
Antioquia, Medellín, Colombia
Edited by:
Lucia Lopalco,
San Raffaele Hospital (IRCCS), Italy
Morgane Bomsel,
Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale
Laura Fantuzzi,
Istituto Superiore di Sanità (ISS), Italy
Luis F. García
Specialty section:
Viral Immunology,
Frontiers in Immunology
García LF (2020) Immune Response,
Inflammation, and the Clinical
Spectrum of COVID-19.
Front. Immunol. 11:1441.
The current COVID-19 pandemic began in December 2019 in Wuhan (China) and
rapidly extended to become a global sanitary and economic emergency. Its etiological
agent is the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2. COVID-19 presents a wide spectrum of clinical
manifestations, which ranges from an asymptomatic infection to a severe pneumonia
accompanied by multisystemic failure that can lead to a patient’s death. The immune
response to SARS-CoV-2 is known to involve all the components of the immune system
that together appear responsible for viral elimination and recovery from the infection.
Nonetheless, such immune responses are implicated in the disease’s progression to
COVID-19 and its etiological agent SARS-CoV-2, stressing the similarities with other
severe coronavirus infections, such as SARS and MERS, but more importantly, pointing
toward the evidence supporting the hypothesis that the clinical spectrum of COVID-19
is a consequence of the corresponding variable spectrum of the immune responses to
the virus. The critical point where progression of the disease ensues appears to center
on loss of the immune regulation between protective and altered responses due to
exacerbation of the inflammatory components. Finally, it appears possible to delineate
certain major challenges deserving of exhaustive investigation to further understand
COVID-19 immunopathogenesis, thus helping to design more effective diagnostic,
therapeutic, and prophylactic strategies.
Keywords: COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, immune response, T cells, antibodies, cytokines, inflammation, spectrum
The current COVID-19 pandemic, caused by the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 and initiated with the
first cases observed in Wuhan (China) in December 2019, has expanded dramatically throughout
the world (1, 2). This expansion has had devastating effects in many countries due to its
contagiousness and the high number of patients presenting with severe infections and elevated
death risk, requiring specialized medical care in intensive care units (ICU). For this reason, the
WHO declared it a Global Sanitary Emergency on January 30, 2020 (3). An important aspect to
highlight during the present crisis is the speed at which research studies have been developed,
leading toward a better understanding of the epidemiology, clinical manifestations, risk factors,
and transmission dynamics (1, 4–8), as well as to the identification of the etiological agent (9, 10),
including its genome, morphological structure, and molecules (11–13), its relationship with other
COVID-19 Clinical and Immune Spectra
neutralizing antibodies (31). S is a type I trimeric glycoprotein
that protrudes from the virion membrane, giving it the
appearance of a crown. S is formed by two subunits: S1, or bulb,
that contains the RBD (32–39); and S2, or stalk, responsible for
the fusion of the virion with the host cell membrane (23, 35, 36,
As described above, the main receptor for SARS-CoV and
SARS-CoV-2 on the membrane of the target cells is the
Angiotensin 2 Converting Enzyme (ACE2), a metallopeptidase
present on the membrane of many cells, including type-I and
-II pneumocytes, small intestine enterocytes, kidney proximal
tubules cells, the endothelial cells of arteries and veins, and
the arterial smooth muscle, among other tissues (43, 44). RBDACE2 binding induces conformational changes on S that lead
to cleavage of S1 and S2, a process mediated by the serine
protease TMPRSS2, allowing S2 to facilitate the fusion of the virus
envelope with the cell membrane, thus permitting viral RNA
entrance into the cytoplasm of the target cells (23, 31, 35, 42, 45).
Thereafter, viral RNA serves as a template for the translation
of the polyproteins pp1a and pp1b that are cleaved into 5–
16 non-structural proteins (nsp2-nsp9), which in turn induce
rearrangement of the membranes to form the vesicles where
viral replication and transcription complexes are anchored. The
virions are assembled in the ER-Golgi and mature virions are
subsequently released by the secretory pathway (23).
coronaviruses (14), its entrance into the host cells by binding
the Angiotensin II Converting Enzyme (ACE2) (9), its
intracellular replication (15), and the immune response of
the infected individuals (16–19). All these studies aim at
developing diagnostic tests, strategies for clinical management,
effective antiviral agents, and eventually, production of a
protective vaccine.
the immune response against SARS-CoV-2 and the relationship
between the protective and inflammatory responses and
COVID-19 clinical spectrum, ranging from asymptomatic
the principal immunological research challenges posed by
COVID-19 pandemics. The immune response in humans and
experimental animals against infection by SARS-CoV and
MERS-CoV has been studied extensively and there are many
COVID-19 with SARS and MERS, it will be necessary, at certain
specific points, to cite the research done on those infections.
THE VIRUS
The virus responsible for the epidemic that began in Wuhan was
simultaneously identified by Wu et al. (9), and by Zhou et al. (10),
who named it WH-Human 1 and 2019-nCoV, respectively. These
researchers also deciphered the virus genome, its origin from bat
coronaviruses, and ACE2 as its receptor on the membrane of
host cells. On February 11, 2020, the WHO officially named the
infection COVID-19 and the virus as SARS-CoV-2 (24).
SARS-CoV-2 belongs to the family Coronaviridae, which
includes a large number of species capable of infecting various
wild animals, some of which also affect humans (25–27). In
humans, most coronavirus infections result in mild respiratory
Infections and may be responsible for 20–30% of common
colds (28). However, both SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, which
emerged in the last two decades, were responsible for epidemics
of severe respiratory syndromes. The three coronaviruses causing
more serious pathologies belong to beta-CoV (23) and, despite
their genomic and structural similarities, they differ significantly
epidemiologically. SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV have a low
transmissibility but a high lethality, while SARS-CoV-2 has an
extremely high transmissibility and a degree of lethality not yet
established globally.
Coronaviruses have a single-stranded positive RNA of nearly
30 Kbp, a spheroidal shape, and a diameter of 80–120 nm. Their
envelope contains the spike –S-, membrane -M-, and envelope
-E-, proteins, and the nucleocapsid -N- inside the virion that
covers the RNA (23). On the genome, from 5′ to 3′ , are located the
genes for the replicases ORF 1a,b which occupy two thirds of the
genome and code for the polyproteins pp1a and pp1b (9, 23, 29).
Located toward the 3′ end are the genes for structural proteins S,
E, M, and N (9, 23, 30).
Protein S is the best studied of the coronaviruses proteins,
since it contains the Receptor-Binding-Domain (RBD) for the
ligand on the host cell membrane, and also has epitopes
recognized by T and B cells, which induce the production of
THE INFECTION
The COVID-19 pathological process exhibits a wide spectrum of
clinical manifestations, ranging from asymptomatic infections,
to mild (common cold-type), moderate, and finally severe
(∼15%) infections; the latter frequently requires hospitalization
in ICU to ensure assisted respiratory support and other medical
treatments until recovery, or possibly death, of the patient. The
wide spectrum of clinical manifestations found in COVID-19
patients has been associated with risk factors such as gender and
age. Diabetes, cardiovascular disease, or diseases, or treatments
affecting the immune system result in the highest risk of severe
disease and death (6, 8, 8, 46–48). It is, however, estimated
that nearly 80% of all infections remain undocumented, either
because patients are asymptomatic or present with very mild
symptoms (49). From the epidemiological point of view, these
inapparently infected persons may have low viral loads, while still
disseminating the virus and can therefore be responsible either
for silent epidemics, leading to infection in more susceptible
people who will eventually develop a clinical disease, or for
contributing to the establishment of herd immunity (28, 50).
SARS-CoV-2 is acquired by exposure to microdroplets present
in the exhalates of infected individuals or by contact with
reaches the bronchioles and alveolar spaces, the main targets
are the cells of the bronchial epithelium and the type-II ACE2+
pneumocytes of the alveolar epithelium. SARS-CoV infection
induces autophagy (51, 52), detachment of the basal membrane,
and inhibition of ACE2 expression (20, 53), hence allowing
angiotensin II to bind the AT1aR receptor, resulting in acute lung
COVID-19 Clinical and Immune Spectra
ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSE
damage (54). Importantly, the main early defense mechanism of
the infected cell is the production of type-I and type -III IFN and,
although coronaviruses are sensitive to their anti-viral effects,
they are able to inhibit its induction (16, 20, 52, 55). The release
of large number of virions leads to both infection of neighboring
target cells and viremia, the latter resulting in systemic
infection since ACE2+ cells are widely distributed in many
The transition between innate and adaptive immune responses
is critical for the clinical progress of SARS-CoV-2 infection.
It is at this crucial moment when immune regulatory events,
still poorly understood, will lead to the development of either
a protective immune response or an exacerbated inflammatory
response (18, 19, 58, 59). The protective response is T cell
dependent, with CD4 helping B cells, geared toward the
production of specific neutralizing antibodies, and cytotoxic CD8
cells capable of eliminating infected cells. It is worth noting
that 80% of the infiltrating cells in COVID-19 are CD8 (16).
Contrariwise, a dysfunctional response, unable to inhibit viral
replication and elimination of the infected cells, may result
in an exacerbated inflammatory response leading possibly to a
cytokine storm, manifested clinically by severe acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS) and systemic consequences, such
as disseminated intravascular coagulation. In a SARS-CoV
primate model of infection, Clay et al. (60) showed that the
virus replicated in the lungs until Day 10 post-infection; but,
surprisingly, lung inflammation was more intense after virus
clearance, reaching its peak at Day 14 and remaining so until Day
28. These results suggest that an early phase dependent on virus
replication does occur, while a later viral-independent, immunedependent phase seems to be accompanied by an exacerbated
inflammatory component. The viral-independent phase has been
explained by the inflammatory reaction secondary to ACE2
inhibition or by an autoimmune phenomenon due to the epitope
spreading caused by prolonged tissue destruction (20, 61). It
remains to be demonstrated whether a similar two-phase course
also occurs in COVID-19.
Although T and B cells, macrophages, and DCs do not
express ACE2, some reports suggest that DC-SIGN may serve
as a trans receptor for SARS-CoV on DCs, which even when
not infected may transfer the virus to other susceptible cells
(22, 23, 62). Recently, Vandakari and Wilce (63) reported that
CD26, an aminopeptidase involved in T cell activation, may
bind to the S protein of SARS-CoV-2, resulting in a nonproductive T cell infection; Wang et al. (64) reported that CD147,
a protein of the immunoglobulins superfamily that induces
the metalloproteinases of the extracellular matrix, binds to the
S1 domain and facilitates viral entrance into host cells. The
significance of non-productive T cells infection is not clear;
however, it is tempting to speculate that it may be related to the
lymphopenia found in patients with SARS, MERS, and COVID19 (65). The binding of SARS-CoV-2 S protein to molecules
like CD26 and CD147, which participate in T cell activation,
would suggest that a non-productive T cell infection may result
in activation-induced cell death (AICD). MERS-CoV has been
reported to induce T cells apoptosis (23, 66), and there is evidence
that T cells are functionally exhausted in patients with severe
THE INNATE IMMUNE RESPONSE
During viral infections, after viruses enter the host cells they
are recognized by Pattern Recognition Receptors (PRR) such
as TLR7 and TLR8 in the case of single-stranded RNA viruses,
RIG-I-like (RLRs), and NLR, all expressed by epithelial cells
as well as by local cells of the innate immune response,
such as alveolar macrophages (23). Upon ligand binding,
PRRs recruit adaptor proteins which activate crucial downstream transcription factors, including interferon regulatory
factor (IRF), NF-κB, and AP-1, resulting in production of the
Type-I and -III antiviral Interferons and different chemokines
(56). These chemokines attract more innate response cells
[polymorphonuclear leukocytes, monocytes, NK cells, dendritic
cells (DC)], which also produce chemokines, such as MIG,
IP-10, and MCP-1, capable of recruiting lymphocytes, which
in turn, will recognize the viral antigens presented by DCs
(20, 22). Recent publications highlight the initial phases of the
SARS-CoV-2 infection, compared to other coronavirus, and their
effects on subsequent immune and inflammatory responses.
Chu et al. (57) compared the in vitro infection of human lung
explants with SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 and demonstrated
that both viruses can equally infect type-I and -II pneumocytes,
plus alveolar macrophages, although SARS-CoV2 had a better
capacity to replicate in pulmonary tissues. Interestingly, while
SARS-CoV induced the expression of IFN-I, IFN-II, and IFNIII, SARS-CoV-2 failed to induce any such immune mediators
and was also less efficient in inducting other cytokines. SARSCoV induced the production of the 11 cytokines studied,
while SARS-CoV-2 induced only five (IL-6, MCP1, CXCL1,
CXCL5, and CXCL10/IP10). Blanco-Melo et al. (55) studied the
transcriptional response to SARS-CoV-2, compared to SAR-CoV,
MERS-CoV, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), parainfluenza
virus 3 (HPIV3), and influenza A virus (IAV), in in vitro infection
of respiratory cell lines, experimental in vivo infection of ferrets,
and post-mortem lung samples of COVID-19 patients. Their
results show that SARS-CoV-2 induces a particular signature
characterized by reduced IFN-I and IFN-III responses and
significant induction of multiple proinflammatory chemokines,
IL-1B, IL-6, TNF, and IL1RA. These findings were further
supported by the increased serum levels of these molecules in
COVID-19 patients. Altogether, these reports strongly suggest
that SARS-CoV-2 differs from other coronaviruses in its capacity
to replicate within the pulmonary tissue, elude from the antiviral
effects of IFN-I and IFN-III, activate innate responses, and induce
the production of the cytokines required for the recruitment of
adaptive immunity cells.
THE ANTIBODY RESPONSE
Multiple evidences support that the humoral response, mainly
antibodies against the S protein, blocks virus attachment to
COVID-19 Clinical and Immune Spectra
susceptible ACE2+ cells (33, 41, 68, 69). However, there are still
many questions regarding the significance of antibodies against
the different viral proteins, and the cross reactivity of antibodies
against other highly prevalent alpha- and beta-coronavirus,
although it seems that cross reactivity occurs mostly within
the beta-coronaviridae (61, 70), particularly between SARS-CoV
and SARS-CoV-2 that share 90% of the amino acid sequence
in S1 (31). However, it can also happen with other antigens,
as demonstrated in the outbreak of HCoV-OC43 in British
Columbia (Canada) where cross reactivity of anti-N antibodies
with SARS-CoV was found (71). In this respect, it is interesting
that there is no information regarding whether survivors of the
SARS and MERS epidemics became infected with SARS-CoV-2,
and if so, the nature of their clinical and immunological behavior.
IgM and IgA antibodies can be detected early during the
1st week of symptom onset, whereas IgG can be detected at
around 14 days after the initiation of symptoms (61, 70, 72);
however, given the short time elapsed since the beginning
of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is not known how long the
protecting levels of these blocking antibodies will remain active.
Nevertheless, in a cohort of SARS survivors followed for 6
years, Tang et al. (73) found that anti-SARS-CoV antibodies
specific memory B cells, whereas specific memory T cells were
present in 14/23 (60.9%) of the SARS survivors studied. Although
the diagnostic value of the serological tests for COVID-19 is
not yet fully defined (70, 74–76), it should be stated that the
study of the antibodies against different SARS-CoV-2 antigens, in
different populations and at various times during the pandemic,
would be an important way of understanding the dynamics of
transmission and seroprevalence as a proxy to herd immunity.
Furthermore, it is equally important to conduct serial antibody
titers measurements in cohorts of COVID-19 survivors in order
to determine how long the immune memory remains active and
its effect on the possible reemergence of SARS-CoV-2, or other
coronavirus outbreaks.
Ho et al. (87) studying the antibody response in SARS, found that
patients with more severe clinical courses had earlier and higher
antibody responses, and hypothesized that earlier responders
may have had, during the acute phase, cross-reacting antibodies
with non-SARS coronaviruses. Jaume et al. (88) and Yip et al.
(89) demonstrated that anti-S antibodies, while inhibiting viral
entrance in permissive cells, potentiated the infection by binding
to IgG Fc receptor-II positive (FcγRII+ ) cells, like B cells and
macrophages. Thus, IgG anti-S antibodies bound to FcγRII
on mononuclear phagocyte membranes enhance viral entrance
through canonical viral-receptor pathways, as recently shown for
MERS-CoV (90), thereby activating these cells and inducing the
production of proinflammatory cytokines.
THE CLINICAL-IMMUNOGICAL
SPECTRUM OF COVID-19
In order to understand COVID-19 immunopathogenesis, it
is important to elucidate what lies at the root of immune
response failure occurring in infected individuals resulting at
times in deviation of the protective response into a dysfunctional
program, leading to cytokine release syndrome (CRS) with severe
inflammation and, eventually, a multi-systemic failure. A better
understanding of these events would contribute to the design of
differential therapeutic approaches, depending on the stage of
the disease, and to the delineation of prognostic, and predictive
biomarkers. Unfortunately, there are no studies on the immune
response in infected asymptomatic individuals, which would
allow a better characterization of the protective immune response
as it occurs under the natural conditions of the infection process.
Thus, the present view is based on the comparison between
patients with moderate and those with severe infections, and
also with those in the convalescent stage. Another aspect to be
explored is the effect of previous exposure to other less virulent
coronaviruses that may have cross-reactivity with more virulent
ones. Additionally, most of the studies have been done using
blood samples, which do not necessarily correlate with the events
going on in the affected tissues. Fortunately, several studies on
discussed below.
From an immunological point of view, the wide clinical
spectrum of COVID-19 allows us to postulate different
hypotheses, some of them which have already been proven,
outcomes during the course of COVID-19 and allows for an
analysis of the immune response at each clinical stage. However,
it must be noted that the immune response is conditioned
by epidemiological variables, such as intensity and duration of
exposure to the virus and possible variations in viral virulence
and, on the host side, genetic susceptibility/resistance and health
conditions at the time of exposure. The latter includes, among
other variables, age and the existence of comorbidities that may
directly affect the immune system (8, 48).
Despite its high infectivity, not everyone exposed to SARSCoV-2 becomes infected (15). The reasons for such resistance are
The Role of Secretory Immunoglobulin a
It is worth noting that the role of secretory immunoglobulin
A (sIgA) in COVID-19 has received little attention, despite the
fact that SARS-CoV-2 enters the body through the respiratory
mucosa and sIgA is fundamental to the mucosal defenses.
Furthermore, several studies into COVID-19 have shown the
presence of serum IgA against SARS-CoV-2 (70, 77–79) and, in
preclinical studies with anti-SARS vaccines, administered either
sub-lingually or intranasally, the presence of neutralizing IgA was
demonstrated in bronchoalveolar lavages (80–82). These findings
support the importance of investigating the presence of sIgA in
secretions of patients with COVID-19 and defining its possible
anti-viral neutralizing activity in respiratory tract mucosa (83).
Antibody-Dependent Enhancement (ADE)
An intriguing phenomenon that worries many clinicians and
researchers is the “Antibody-Dependent Enhancement” (ADE),
which could be linked to the severity of coronavirus infections
and could possibly create difficulties with new vaccines (84–86).
COVID-19 Clinical and Immune Spectra
MERS (100). Xu et al. (101) described bilateral diffuse alveolar
damage (DAD) with cellular fibromyxoid exudates, pneumocytes
desquamation and hyaline membrane formation, multinucleated
syncytial cells, atypical enlarged pneumocytes with large nuclei,
amphophilic granular cytoplasm, and prominent nucleoli, as well
as interstitial mononuclear infiltration. Zhang et al. (47) also
reported DAD with denudation of the alveolar epithelia, reactive
type-II pneumocyte hyperplasia, intra-alveolar fibrinous exudate,
and loose fibrous plugs, along with loose interstitial fibrosis
an anti-Rp3 NP of SARS-CoV-2, demonstrated the presence
of the virus on alveolar epithelial cells, including damaged,
desquamated cells within the alveolar space, but its presence was
only minimally detected on the blood vessels and the interstitium.
Taken together, the histopathological findings in COVID-19
fatalities support that, in addition to the direct cytopathic effect
of SARS-CoV-2 on the pneumocytes, an immunological response
exists that includes a severe inflammatory reaction and extensive
lung damage (22).
still unknown. It is possible that a small, occasional inoculum
does not reach the lower respiratory tract, where susceptible
target cells are found. Nevertheless, as yet unidentified genetic
conditions may also explain this per se resistance. On this
regard, no association of SARS with ACE2 polymorphisms was
A central tenet of our view on COVID-19
immunopathogenesis is that a protective immune response must
be present in patients with asymptomatic and mild infections,
and even in some with moderate infections who do not progress
to severe disease. This response must be capable of inhibiting
viral replication and eliminating the host’s infected cells with
minimal tissue damage and low inflammatory manifestations
genetic conditions for viral antigen presentation by HLA-I and II
molecules to CD8 and CD4 T cells, respectively. In this context,
Grifoni et al. (92), using a bioinformatic approach, identified 241
candidate epitopes for HLA-II alleles in SARS-CoV-2, and 628
for class I alleles, which may be bound by the more common
HLA alleles, irrespective of their ethnic group. The high number
of epitopes, also present in SARS-CoV (93), may explain the lack
of a consistent association of SARS with HLA antigens (94–98).
THE IMMUNOLOGICAL PROFILE OF
COVID-19 PATIENTS
There is consensus that in severe COVID-19 infection, an
exacerbated pulmonary and systemic inflammatory response
occurs, with increased serum levels of inflammatory markers,
such as C-reactive protein (CRP), lactic dehydrogenase (LDH),
In patients with COVID-19, the post mortem histopathological
findings are similar to those reported in SARS (99) and
COVID-19 Clinical and Immune Spectra
and the perforin content of NK and CD8+ cells, which also
negatively correlate with the increased number of circulating
myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) (109). Although the
number of CD4 cells decreased, they expressed activation
markers such as CD69, CD38, CD44, and HLA-DR, including
Th17 CD4+ CCR6+ cells, (108). NK cells also decreased in
both moderate and severe cases of the disease (107, 110).
Monocytopenia is also found in COVID-19 patients, particularly
in severe cases, but the circulating monocytes belong mainly to
the CD14+ CD16+ inflammatory monocyte subset (108).
ferritin, D-dimer, and IL-6 (2, 5, 6, 67, 102), all of which may
result in cytokine storm (102–104), similarly to SARS and MERS
patients with moderate and severe COVID-19.
Changes in Circulating Cells
Regarding cellular changes, most studies show that lymphopenia,
although present in moderate infections, is more pronounced in
severe COVID-19 (17, 108) and affects mainly T cells, including
CD4 Th1 and Tregs, but particularly CD8 (17, 48, 108–110).
Also, in severe COVID-19 the number of circulating naive T
cells increases and the number of memory T cells decreases
(106). Circulating CD8 in patients with severe COVID 19
exhibited phenotypes associated with abnormal functionality
(CD8+ IFN-γ+ GM-CSF+ ) and exhaustion (Tim3+ Pd-1+ ) (108)
or (NKG2+ CD107a+ IFN-γ+ grzB+ ) (67). The latter phenotype
is also found in NK cells. Interestingly, a negative correlation
has been reported between serum levels of IL-6 and IL-8
Changes in Cytokine/Chemokine Plasma
Plasma levels of cytokines and chemokines are also increased
in COVID-19, but are higher in severe infections, and includes
IL-2, IL-2R, IL-6, IL-7, IL-8 IL-10, IP10, MIP1A, and TNFα (5, 17, 106, 109, 110). High levels of plasmatic IL-6 have
been consistently reported in COVID-19 and even appear to be
associated with poor prognosis and risk of death (8). Thus, its
measurement has been proposed as a good biomarker to monitor
these patients. Liu et al. (111) studied sixty COVID-19 patients,
half of whom had a severe case of the disease and high IL-6 levels.
Baseline IL-6 was higher in more severe cases and correlated with
bilateral interstitial lung involvement and high body temperature,
as well as with other serum markers for acute inflammation. Of
the 30 patients with severe disease, 25 improved clinically and
showed a significant decrease in IL-6 levels, while these levels
increased in three patients with disease progression. Coomes
et al. (112) performed a meta-analysis of 16 papers, that included
10,798 Chinese patients, in order to test the evidence that IL-6
levels correlate with COVID-19 severity, and the effectiveness of
treatment with Tocilizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody
against IL-6 receptor. All COVID-19 patients had increased
levels of serum IL-6, but it was 2.9-fold higher in patients with
severe COVID-19. Twenty-one patients treated with tocilizumab
improved clinically with no adverse effects or deaths. Also, Xu
et al. (113) reported very promising results using Tocilizumab
treatment in 20 patients with severe COVID-19; all patients
improved remarkably within a few days and all were discharged
from the ICU within an average of 15 days.
TABLE 1 | Clue immunological findings in blood of patients with moderate or
severe COVID-19.
COVID-19 moderate
COVID-19 severe
Zhou et al.
No data
Huang et al.
↑ IL-2, IL-7, IP10, MIP1A, TNF
Wu et al.
↑ PMNs, ↓ Lymphocytes,
↑ IL-6 (at risk of death)
Qin et al.
No data
↑ PMNs, ↓ Lymphocytes, ↓T
(Th1 y Tregs), B, NK; ↑ T
Chen et al.
↑IL-2R, IL-6, IL-10, TNF;
↓↓ Lymphocytes, ↓CD4 and
↑↑IL-2R, IL-6, IL-10.TNF
Wan et al.
↓ CD4, CD8, B, NK
→ IL-4, IL-10, IL-17, TNF,
↓↓ CD4, CD8, B, NK
Zheng et al.
↓ CD8, NK
(NKG2+ CD107a+ IFNγ+ grzB+ )
↓↓ CD8, NK
(NKG2+ CD107a+ IFNγ+ grzB+ )
Lei et al.
↓NK, ↑Tγδ CD25+ , → PD-1
Zhou et al.
↓ Lymphocytes, ↓ Monocytes,
↓CD4; → PMNs, B, NK;
↑ MonocytesCD14+ CD16+
↑ IL-2R, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10
Xu et al.
Bordoni et al.
Dynamics of the Immune and Inflammatory
During the course of COVID-19 infection, viral replication,
immune response, and inflammatory reaction are dynamic
events that can change rapidly, resulting in different outcomes;
several reports have addressed these changes. Thevarajan et al.
(114) reported the case of a patient with mild to moderate
infection that was clinically, virologically, and immunologically
followed over the course of the disease, including her recovery 13
days after the initiation of symptoms, and through to Day 20 at
which point she had recovered. The virus was detected on Days 4
IgM and IgG anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies progressively increase
from Day 7 through to Day 20. Circulating antibody-secreting
B cells, CD3− CD19+ CD27hi CD38hi , appeared in the blood at
(↑CD69+ CD38+ CD44+ ),
↑CD8+ IFN-γ+ GM-CSF+
↑↑ MonocytesCD14+ CD16+
↑↑CD4+ CCR6+ Th17
↓ Lymphocytes, ↓ CD3, ↑
↑ IL-1b, IL-6, Il-8,TNF
↓ Lymphocytes, ↓ CD3, ↑
MDSC, ↓ NKperf+
↑ IL-1b, IL-6, Il-8,TNF
→ , normal values; ↓, decreased, ↓↓, severe decreased; ↑, increased, ↑↑, severe
COVID-19 Clinical and Immune Spectra
2 The simultaneous presence of other viruses in the mucosa
of the respiratory tract, common in children, could limit the
growth of SARS-CoV-2 by direct virus-to-virus competition;
3 The treatment with ACE2 inhibitors and angiotensin receptors
blockers, a common procedure in hypertensive adults, upregulates ACE2 expression, increasing susceptibility to SARSCoV-2 infection. These theoretical possibilities require clinical
and experimental validation.
the time of viral clearance (Day 7), peaked on Day 8, and
remained high through to Day 20. Follicular helper T cells (TFH ),
CD4+ CXCR5+ ICOS+ PD-1+ , were also detected on Day 7 and
continued increasing through to Day 20. Activated cytotoxic
CD8 T cells, CD8+ CD38+ HLA-DR+ , were also present on Day 7,
increased through to Day 9, and then decreased through to Day
20, although with values higher than in healthy controls. There
was no increase in inflammatory CD14+ CD16+ monocytes, nor
in activated NK CD3− CD56+ HLA-DR+ cells. Regarding serum
cytokines, of the 17 pro-inflammatory cytokines studied, only
low levels of MCP1/CCL2 were found on Days 7–9. This case
is interesting since there are very few studies on patients with
mild infections and because IgM and IgG antibodies, antibody
secreting B cells, CD4 TFH cells, and activated cytotoxic CD8 cells
were shown to be circulating before resolution of the symptoms.
Ong et al. (115) compared the blood transcriptional profile of
three patients in early phases of Infection -one of whom evolved
to a severe disease- with 10 healthy volunteers. The main findings
in the patient who progressed to severe disease was that only
IL-1A and IL-1B preceded the nadir of the respiratory function,
and that the expression of most inflammatory genes, particularly
IL-6, IL-2, TNF-α, and IFNA1/13, peaked thereafter. Also, in
this patient, transcripts associated with HLA, CD4, and CD8 T
cell activation were diminished, while in the other two patients,
who did not progress to severe disease, the transcription profile
that in the first case the decreased T cell activation may have
helped the inflammatory response by the IL-1 pathway, while
in the other two cases the low inflammatory response allowed a
moderate T cell response.
STUDIES IN BRONCHOALVEOLAR LAVAGE
Findings in blood do not necessarily explain the events occurring
in tissues directly affected by the infection, thus studies in
Xiong et al. (127) used RNA-seq to study BALFs and peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) transcriptome from three
COVID-19 patients (unfortunately their clinical conditions were
not reported) and from three healthy subjects. The BALF cells
in these patients expressed 9,609 genes, 679 of which were
up-regulated and 325 down-regulated, as opposed to controls.
In PBMC, 15,726 genes were expressed, with 707 up-regulated
and 316 down-regulated. BALF cells from patients showed a
differential expression of genes related to viral invasion and
replication (viral RNA was detected in BALFs of all three
patients) such as membrane-associated proteins, endoplasmic
reticulum, and viral transcription. In contrast, PBMCs showed
increased expression of genes related to complement activation,
immunoglobulins, and B cell-mediated responses, while some
genes corresponded to the acute inflammatory response. The
down-regulated genes in patients’ BALF were mostly related to
activation of the immune response. Comparison of the cytokine
genes showed that in BALFs the genes for IL-10, CCL2/MCP-1
(together with its CCR2 receptor), CXCL10/IP-10, CCL3/MIP1A (together with its CCR5 receptor), and CCL4/MIP1B were
differentially up-regulated. Another relevant finding was that
in PBMC, genes related to autophagy, apotopsis, and p53
pathways were up-regulated, a finding that could be related to
the lymphopenia detected in the three patients. Interestingly,
IL-6 transcripts were not increased in PBMCs, although the
patients had high plasma levels of such cytokine, suggesting that
Effect of Age
One of the risk factors most strongly associated with severe
COVID-19 and death is advanced age. Immunosenescence
present in the elderly affects innate immunity (116), but mainly
T cell-dependent adaptive responses (117–120). In addition,
experimental evidence suggests that elderly mice have increased
levels of proinflammatory cytokines and that their alveolar
macrophages are refractory to activation by IFN-γ (121). This
finding is relevant since the protective response that eliminates
the virus depends on cytotoxic CD8 cells and Th1 responses,
with IFN-γ playing an important role in both responses, as
demonstrated in SARS and MERS (122, 123).
Increased susceptibility in the elderly to present with severe
COVID-19 forms contrasts with the lower frequency of these
45 publications on COVID-19 and found that 1–5% of the
patients are children who, although they present with fever
and respiratory symptoms, experience milder symptoms and
among whom death was extremely rare. The increase in
inflammatory markers and lymphocytopenia were also less
common in children. Brodin (125) postulated the following three
explanations for the milder COVID-19 presentation in children:
TABLE 2 | Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) up-regulated in bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid (BALF) of patients with moderate or severe COVID-19.
1 The immune response is qualitatively different in children and
adults, something that has been extensively studied (126);
Up-regulated genes
Xiong et al. (127)
IL-10, CCL2/MCP-1, CCR2, CXCL10/IP-10,
CCL3/MIP-1A, CCR5, and CCL4/MIP1B
Liao et al. (128)
FCN1hi ; FCN1lo SPP1+ ; FCN1− SPP1 inflammatory
monocytes/macrophages in severe disease
CD8 activation and effector molecules and higher
CD8 TCR repertoire in moderate illness
Zhou et al. (129)
CXCL17, CXCL8 and CXCL2, CXCR2, CCL2, CCL7
IL-1β, ISGs, IL-17, TNF, and NF-κB signaling
COVID-19 Clinical and Immune Spectra
circulating IL-6 could have been produced in the lungs, either by
alveolar epithelial cells or by recruited inflammatory cells.
In another study, Liao et al. (128) used scRNA-seq and scTCRseq to determine BALF cells’ transcriptional signature in three
patients with severe and another three with moderate COVID19, and compared them with eight healthy subjects, previously
studied. Their main findings were related to macrophages and
CD8 cells. Macrophages were predominant in BALFs from
patients with severe infection, with a minor proportion of T
and NK cells, as compared with patients with moderate disease.
Macrophages were classified in 22 clusters, according to their
expression of FCN1 (monocyte-derived), SPP1 (pro-fibrotic), and
FABP4 (alveolar macrophages). These genes were differentially
expressed both among the two groups of patients and the healthy
controls. FABP4 was preferentially expressed in healthy controls
and in patients with moderate COVID-19, while FCN1 and
SPP1 were expressed in patients with severe COVID-19. Further
macrophages classification resulted in four groups: Group 1,
FCN1hi only; Group 2, FCN1lo SPP1+ ; Group 3, FCN1− SPP1+ ;
and Group 4, FABP4+ . Group 1 macrophages expressed genes
associated with inflammatory monocytes; Group 2 expressed
chemokines and interferon stimulated genes (ISG); Group 3,
genes related with immune regulation and profibrotic events; and
Group 4 were alveolar macrophage typical genes. According to
the investigators, these results suggest that during SARS-CoV2 infection, inflammatory monocytes (FCN1+ ) are recruited
from the circulation into the lungs, where they differentiate into
SPP1+ macrophages, constituents of the severe inflammatory
reaction. Analysis of the BALF transcriptome showed that T
and NK cells are increased in COVID-19 patients, compared to
healthy controls, which according to their gene expression can
be classified in NK, CD8, CD4, Tregs, and proliferating cells. An
important finding was that genes related to activating molecules,
migration, calcium signaling, and effector molecules were highly
expressed by CD8 cells in patients with moderate infection,
compared with patients with severe COVID-19; this further
supports the role of CD8 cells in the elimination of the virus
and their subsequent, protective immunity. In contrast, patients
with severe disease had a higher expression of genes related to
proliferation, energy generation, and initiation of translation.
These results suggest that in patients with moderate infection
CD8 cells are more differentiated and efficient, while in severe
Infection T cells are in a proliferative stage. Additionally, the
finding that the TCR repertoire is higher in CD8 than in CD4
cells, suggests a larger clonal expansion of the CD8 cells taking
part in the resolution of the infection.
Zhou et al. (129) used metatranscriptomic sequencing to
profile immune signatures in the BALF of eight COVID-19
patients, compared to 146 community-acquired pneumonia
patients and 20 healthy controls. Their results show that in
BALF from COVID-19, the differentially expressed genes (DEGs)
included up-regulated proinflammatory chemokines genes, such
as CXCL17, CXCL8, and CXCL2, as well as the CXCR2
receptor, critical to neutrophil recruitment, and CCL2 and
found that COVID-19 patients up-regulated IL-1β, antiviral
Interferon stimulated genes (ISGs), and genes related to the
IL-17, TNF, and NF-κB signaling pathways. In addition, the
cellular analysis showed an increased neutrophil to lymphocyte
ratio (NLR) in patients with COVID-19 compared to patients
with other pneumonias.
Taken together, findings in BALF demonstrate both a highly
dysregulated innate and adaptive immune response in the
affected lungs of patients with COVID-19.
Just 5 months after the initiation of the COVID-19 pandemic
in China, which extended quickly worldwide to greatly impact
public health and economies, the amount of information
gathered on all aspects of the infection and the celerity with
which the international scientific community has shared such
information is to be used in defining new diagnostic, therapeutic,
or prophylactic protocols. It is also important to consider
the brief amount of time elapsed since the beginning of the
pandemic, during which time it has not been possible to gather
sufficient results from in vitro and experimental animal models
to ensure further understanding of COVID-19’s biology. Even
when considering these limitations, the information provided by
qualitative differences in the immune responses of those infected
with SARS-CoV-2 which seem to correlate with the clinical
manifestations of COVID-19. Although studies of asymptomatic
infected individuals are lacking, the immunological profiles of
patients with moderate infections indicate a protective T celldependent response, in contrast to patients with severe disease
who exhibit an exacerbated systemic inflammation, with signs of
T cells exhaustion.
The following fundamental aspects need to be defined through
close collaboration between clinicians and basic researchers, with
strong support from the public and private financial agencies:
1 The alterations of the immune regulation that allow the
disease to advance from an asymptomatic or mild infection
to a severe disease with poor prognosis. Translational
immunological research focusing on the cellular and
molecular aspects of the virus-host interaction, using
sophisticated bioinformatics and system biology tools,
must be pursued. This includes experimental animal
models required for a deep understanding of COVID19’s immunopathogenesis. Besides patients with moderate
and severe COVID-19, studies in humans must include
seropositive asymptomatic individuals and patients with
virologically confirmed mild infections. These subjects should
be studied in long-term follow-up cohorts.
2 The genetics of resistance/susceptibility at the various stages
of the infection and the disease. Topics like the resistance per
se in exposed non-infected individuals, and the genetic risk
factors for the progression from asymptomatic to moderate
and severe disease must be prioritized. Initiatives like “COVID
COVID-19 Clinical and Immune Spectra
that direction.
3 Based on the previous points it is necessary to find correlates
of protective immunity and prognostic biomarkers to guide
personalized management of infected individuals in order to
prevent their progression to severe forms of the disease.
4 New pharmacological and immune-based treatments must
be developed simultaneously with rigorous evaluation of
treatments already available. The analysis of the currently
available pharmacological treatments, or those under
Possible immunotherapies may include: convalescent plasma,
already assayed in a small number of patients (131–133);
monoclonal antibodies against the IL-6 receptor (112, 113)
and interferon β (134, 135); and Leronlimab CCR5 blocking
antibody (136), among others. Fortunately, a good number
of controlled clinical assays have been initiated under strict
dist=) which will hopefully provide, within a prudential
time, therapeutic agents for the efficient treatment of
COVID-19 patients.
5 Development of vaccines to prevent, and hopefully eliminate,
SARS-CoV-2 and other coronavirus infections. As expected,
many investigators and biotechnology companies are
dedicating all their efforts and resources to obtaining an
effective vaccine in the shortest time possible. Although this
the different approaches, mostly targeting the S protein
with its RBD. Vaccine candidates include RNA and DNA
vaccines, recombinant proteins, and vectored vaccines, as
well as inactivated and live attenuated vaccines. The first
immunogenicity of a recombinant adenovirus type-5 (Ad5)
vectored expressing S protein of SARS-CoV-2 (138). One
hundred ninety-five participants were allocated in three
dose groups and followed for 28 days post-vaccination.
Mild adverse reactions were common within the first 7 days
after vaccination with no serious events noted during the
observation period. Neutralizing antibodies were detected at
Day 14 and peaked at Day 28 post-vaccination, and specific
CD4 and CD8 cells peaked at Day 14 and remained present
through Day 28 in the three dose groups. It is important to
note that development of an efficient vaccine requires a deep
understanding not only of the viral antigens and epitopes, but
also of the immunological events leading up to the epitope
presentation and recognition resulting in the establishment
of a protective immune memory, the effector mechanisms
in response to the antigens, and the adjuvants present in
the proposed vaccine, one that would have minimal side
Finally, it is important to remember what many investigators
of SARS and MERS have written in their publications, long
before the emergency of COVID-19 pandemics: what will be
learned from this pandemic must be used to prevent future
coronavirus epidemics.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
To professors Gloria Vásquez and Carlos F. Narvaez for
professor Angela Restrepo and Ms. Sally Station for their
valuable suggestions and help in the preparation of the
6. Chen T, Wu D, Chen H, Yan W, Yang D, Chen G, et al. Clinical characteristics
of 113 deceased patients with coronavirus disease 2019: retrospective study.
7. Kucharski AJ, Russell WT, Diamond C, Liu Y, Edmunds J, Funk
S, et al. Early dynamics of transmission and control of COVID19: a mathematical modelling study. Lancet Infect Dis. (2020) 29:553–
8. Wu C, Chen X, Cai Y, Xia J, Zhou X, Xu S, et al. Risk factors associated
with acute respiratory distress syndrome and death in patients with
coronavirus disease 2019 pneumonia in Wuhan, China. JAMA Intern Med.
9. Wu F, Zhao S, Yu B, Chen MY, Wang W, Song GZ, et al. A new coronavirus
associated with human respiratory disease in China. Nature. (2020) 579:265–
10. Zhou P, Yang LX, Wang GX, Hu B, Zhang L, Zhang W, et al. A pneumonia
outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin. Nature.
11. Wen F, Yu H, Guo J, Li Y, Luo K, Huang S. Identification of the hypervariable genomic hotspot for the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2. J Infect.
12. Cardenas-Conejo Y, Linan-Rico A, Garcia-Rodriguez DA, Centeno-Leija
S, Serrano-Posada H. An exclusive 42 amino acid signature in pp1ab
protein provides insights into the evolutive history of the 2019 novel
1. Li Q, Guan X, Wu P, Wang X, Zhou L, Tong Y, et al. Early
transmission dynamics in Wuhan, China, of novel coronavirus-infected
2. Guan WJ, Ni YZ, Hu Y, Liang HW, Ou QC, He XJ, et al. Clinical
characteristics of coronavirus disease 2019 in China. N Engl J Med. (2020)
3. World Health Organization. Statement on the Second Meeting of the
International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee regarding
4. Chen N, Zhou M, Dong X, Qu J, Gong F, Han Y, et al. Epidemiological
and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel coronavirus
pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study. Lancet. (2020) 395:507–
5. Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, Zhao J, Hu Y, et al. Clinical features of
patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet.
COVID-19 Clinical and Immune Spectra
35. Hoffmann M, Kleine-Weber H, Schroeder S, Kruger N, Herrler T, Erichsen
S, et al. SARS-CoV-2 cell entry depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and is
blocked by a clinically proven protease inhibitor. Cell. (2020) 181:270–
36. Lan J, Ge J, Yu J, Shan S, Zhou H, Fan S, et al. Structure of the SARS-CoV-2
spike receptor-binding domain bound to the ACE2 receptor. Nature. (2020)
37. Liu Z, Xiao X, Wei X, Li J, Yang J, Tan H, et al. Composition and
divergence of coronavirus spike proteins and host ACE2 receptors predict
potential intermediate hosts of SARS-CoV-2. J Med Virol. (2020) 92:595–601.
38. Luan J, Lu Y, Jin X, Zhang L. Spike protein recognition of
mammalian ACE2 predicts the host range and an optimized ACE2
for SARS-CoV-2 infection. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. (2020)
39. Yan R, Zhang Y, Li Y, Xia L, Guo Y, Zhou Q. Structural basis for the
recognition of SARS-CoV-2 by full-length human ACE2. Science. (2020)
40. Wrapp D, Wang N, Corbett SK, Goldsmith AJ, Hsieh LC, Abiona O, et al.
Cryo-EM structure of the 2019-nCoV spike in the prefusion conformation.
41. Ou X, Liu Y, Lei X, Li P, Mi D, Ren L, et al. Characterization
of spike glycoprotein of SARS-CoV-2 on virus entry and its
immune cross-reactivity with SARS-CoV. Nat Commun. (2020)
42. Shang J, Wan Y, Liu C, Yount B, Gully K, Yang Y, et al.
Structure of mouse coronavirus spike protein complexed with
receptor reveals mechanism for viral entry. PLoS Pathog. (2020)
43. Hamming I, Timens W, Bulthuis LM, Lely TA, Navis G, van GH. Tissue
distribution of ACE2 protein, the functional receptor for SARS coronavirus.
A first step in understanding SARS pathogenesis. J Pathol. (2004) 203:631–
44. Zou X, Chen K, Zou J, Han P, Hao J, Han Z. Single-cell RNA-seq data
analysis on the receptor ACE2 expression reveals the potential risk of
different human organs vulnerable to 2019-nCoV infection. Front Med.
45. Letko M, Marzi A, Munster V. Functional assessment of cell entry and
receptor usage for SARS-CoV-2 and other lineage B betacoronaviruses. Nat
46. Yang J, Zheng Y, Gou X, Pu K, Chen Z, Guo Q, et al. Prevalence of
comorbidities in the novel Wuhan coronavirus (COVID-19) infection:
47. Zhang H, Zhou P, Wei Y, Yue H, Wang Y, Hu M, et al. Histopathologic
changes and SARS-CoV-2 immunostaining in the lung of a patient with
48. Zhou Y, Zhang Z, Tian J, Xiong S. Risk factors associated with disease
progression in a cohort of patients infected with the 2019 novel coronavirus.
49. Fauci AS, Lane CH, Redfield RR. Covid-19–navigating the uncharted. N Engl
50. Li R, Pei S, Chen B, Song Y, Zhang T, Yang W, et al. Substantial
of novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV2). Science. (2020) 368:489–
51. Fung TS, Liu DX. The ER stress sensor IRE1 and MAP kinase ERK modulate
autophagy induction in cells infected with coronavirus infectious bronchitis
52. Shi CS, Qi YH, Boularan C, Huang NN, Abu-Asab M, Shelhamer
HJ, et al. SARS-coronavirus open reading frame-9b suppresses innate
immunity by targeting mitochondria and the MAVS/TRAF3/TRAF6
53. Kuba K, Imai Y, Rao S, Gao H, Guo F, Guan B, et al. (2005). A crucial role of
angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) in SARS coronavirus-induced lung
human-pathogenic coronavirus (SARS-CoV2). J Med Virol. (2020)92:688–
Shen Z, Xiao Y, Kang L, Ma W, Shi L, Zhang L, et al. Genomic diversity of
SARS-CoV-2 in Coronavirus Disease 2019 patients. Clin Infect Dis. (2020)
Andersen KG, Rambaut A, Lipkin IW, Holmes CE, Garry
RF. The proximal origin of SARS-CoV-2. Nat Med. (2020)
Shi Y, Wang Y, Shao C, Huang J, Gan J, Huang X, et al. COVID-19
infection: the perspectives on immune responses. Cell Death Differ. (2020)
Li G, Fan Y, Lai Y, Han T, Li Z, Zhou P, et al. Coronavirus infections and
Chen G, Wu D, Guo W, Cao Y, Huang D, Wang H, et al. Clinical and
immunological features of severe and moderate coronavirus disease 2019.
Cao X. COVID-19: immunopathology and its implications for therapy. Nat
Perlman S, Dandekar AA. Immunopathogenesis of coronavirus
Lau YL, Peiris JS. Pathogenesis of severe acute respiratory syndrome. Curr
Fung TS, Liu DX. Human coronavirus: host-pathogen interaction. Annu Rev
World Health Organization. Naming the Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19
naming-the-coronavirus-disease-(covid-2019)-and-the-virus-that-causesit (accessed March 14, 2020).
Li X, Zai J, Zhao Q, Nie Q, Li Y, Foley TB, et al. Evolutionary history, potential
intermediate animal host, and cross-species analyses of SARS-CoV-2. J Med
Li B, Si RH, Zhu Y, Yang LX, Anderson ED, Shi LZ, et al.
Discovery of bat coronaviruses through surveillance and probe
Raoult D, Zumla A, Locatelli F, Ippolito G, Kroemer G. Coronavirus
infections: epidemiological, clinical and immunological features and
Wang N, Shang J, Jiang S, Du L. Subunit vaccines against emerging
pathogenic human coronaviruses. Front Microbiol. (2020) 11:
Chen Y, Liu Q, Guo D. Emerging coronaviruses: genome
structure, replication, and pathogenesis. J Med Virol. (2020)
Walls AC, Park JY, Tortorici AM, Wall A, McGuire TA, Veesler D. Structure,
function, and antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein. Cell.
Shang J, Ye G, Shi K, Wan Y, Luo C, Aihara H, et al. Structural
basis of receptor recognition by SARS-CoV-2. Nature. (2020) 581:221–
Tai W, He L, Zhang X, Pu J, Voronin D, Jiang S, et al. Characterization of the
receptor-binding domain (RBD) of 2019 novel coronavirus: implication for
development of RBD protein as a viral attachment inhibitor and vaccine. Cell
Chen Y, Guo Y, Pan Y, Zhao ZJ. Structure analysis of the receptor
binding of 2019-nCoV. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. (2020) 525:135–
COVID-19 Clinical and Immune Spectra
73. Tang F, Quan Y, Xin ZT, Wrammert J, Ma MJ, Lv H, et al. Lack of
peripheral B cell memory responses in recovered patients with Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome: A six years follow-up study. J Immunol. (2011)
74. Okba NMA, Muller AM, Li W, Wang C, GeurtsvanKessel HC, Corman
MV, et al. SARS-CoV-2 specific antibody responses in COVID-19 patients.
75. Petherick A. Developing antibody tests for SARS-CoV-2. Lancet. (2020)
76. Abbasi J. The promise and peril of antibody testing for COVID-19. JAMA.
77. Haveri A, Smura T, Kuivanen S, Osterlund P, Hepojoki J, Ikonen N, et al.
Serological and molecular findings during SARS-CoV-2 infection: the first
case study in Finland, January to February 2020. Euro Surveill. (2020)
78. Okba NMA, Muller AM, Li W, Wang C, GeurtsvanKessel HC, Corman
MV, et al. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2-specific antibody
responses in coronavirus disease 2019 patients. Emerg Infect Dis. (2020)
79. Patel R, Babady E, Theel SE, Storch AG, Pinsky AB, St. George K,
et al. Report from the American Society for Microbiology COVID-19
80. Shim BS, Stadler K, Nguyen HH, Yun HC, Kim WD, Chang
J, et al. Sublingual immunization with recombinant adenovirus
encoding SARS-CoV spike protein induces systemic and mucosal
immunity without redirection of the virus to the brain. Virol J. (2012)
81. Du L, Zhao G, Lin Y, Sui H, Chan C, Ma S, et al. Intranasal vaccination
of recombinant adeno-associated virus encoding receptor-binding domain
of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) spike
protein induces strong mucosal immune responses and provides long-term
protection against SARS-CoV infection. J Immunol. (2008) 180:948–56.
82. Lu B, Huang Y, Huang L, Li B, Zheng Z, Chen Z, et al. Effect of
respiratory syndrome coronavirus in mice. Immunology. (2010) 130:254–
83. Bene MC, de MC, Eveillard M, Lebri Y. Good IgA bad IgG in SARS-CoV-2
84. Peeples L. News feature: avoiding pitfalls in the pursuit of a
COVID-19 vaccine. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. (2020) 117:8218–
85. Tetro JA. Is COVID-19 receiving ADE from other coronaviruses? Microbes
86. Iwasaki A, Yang Y. The potential danger of suboptimal
87. Ho MS, Chen JW, Chen YH, Lin FS, Wang CM, Di J, et al. Neutralizing
antibody response and SARS severity. Emerg. Infect Dis. (2005) 11:1730–
88. Jaume M, Yip SM, Cheung YC, Leung LH, Li HP, Kien F, et al. Anti-severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus spike antibodies trigger infection
of human immune cells via a pH- and cysteine protease-independent
89. Yip MS, Leung HN, Cheung YC, Li HP, Lee HH, Daeron M, et al. Antibodydependent infection of human macrophages by severe acute respiratory
90. Wan Y, Shang J, Sun S, Tai W, Chen J, Geng Q, et al. Molecular mechanism
for antibody-dependent enhancement of coronavirus entry. J Virol. (2020)
91. Chiu RW, Tang LN, Hui SD, Chung TG, Chim SS, Chan CK, et al. ACE2 gene
polymorphisms do not affect outcome of severe acute respiratory syndrome.
92. Grifoni A, Sidney J, Zhang Y, Scheuermann HR, Peters B, Sette A. A
sequence homology and bioinformatic approach can predict candidate
54. Imai Y, Kuba K, Rao S, Huan Y, Guo F, Guan B, et al. Angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 protects from severe acute lung failure. Nature. (2005)
55. Blanco-Melo D, Nilsson-Payant BE, Liu CW, Uhl S, Hoagland D, Moller
R, et al. Imbalanced host response to SARS-CoV-2 drives development of
57. Chu H, Chan FJ, Wang Y, Yuen TT, Chai Y, Hou Y, et al. Comparative
replication and immune activation profiles of SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV
in human lungs: an ex vivo study with implications for the pathogenesis of
58. Manjili RH, Zarei M, Habibi M, Manjili MH. COVID-19 as
an acute inflammatory disease. J Immunol. (2020) ji2000413.
59. Felsenstein S, Herbert AJ, McNamara SP, Hedrich CM. COVID19: Immunology and treatment options. Clin Immunol. (2020)
60. Clay C, Donart N, Fomukong N, Knight BJ, Lei W, Price L, et al. Primary
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection limits replication
but not lung inflammation upon homologous rechallenge. J Virol. (2012)
61. Huang AT, Garcia-Carreras B, Hitchings TDM, Yang B, Katzelnick L,
coronaviruses: antibody kinetics, correlates of protection, and association
of antibody responses with severity of disease. medRxiv [Preprint]. (2020).
62. Yang ZY, Huang Y, Ganesh L, Leung K, Kong PW, Schwartz O,
et al. pH-dependent entry of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus is mediated by the spike glycoprotein and enhanced
by dendritic cell transfer through DC-SIGN. J Virol. (2004)
63. Vankadari N, Wilce JA. Emerging COVID-19 coronavirus: glycan
shield and structure prediction of spike glycoprotein and its
interaction with human CD26. Emerg Microb Infect. (2020)
64. Wang K, Chen W, Zhou SY, Lian Q-J, Zhang Z, Du P, et al. SARSCoV-2 invades host cells via a novel route: CD147-spike protein. bioRxiv.
65. Wang X, Xu W, Hu G, Xia S, Sun Z, Liu Z, et al. SARS-CoV-2 infects T
lymphocytes through its spike protein-mediated membrane fusion. Cell Mol
66. Huang IC, Bailey CC, Weyer LJ, Radoshitzky RS, Becker MM,
Chiang JJ, et al. Distinct patterns of IFITM-mediated restriction of
filoviruses, SARS coronavirus, and influenza A virus. PLoS Pathog. (2011)
67. Zheng M, Gao Y, Wang G, Song G, Liu S, Sun D, et al. Functional exhaustion
of antiviral lymphocytes in COVID-19 patients. Cell Mol Immunol. (2020)
68. He Y, Zhou Y, Liu S, Kou Z, Li W, Farzan M, et al. Receptor-binding domain
of SARS-CoV spike protein induces highly potent neutralizing antibodies:
implication for developing subunit vaccine. Biochem Biophys Res Commun.
69. Bonavia A, Zelus DB, Wentworth ED, Talbot JP, Holmes KV. Identification of
a receptor-binding domain of the spike glycoprotein of human coronavirus
70. Guo L, Ren L, Yang S, Xiao M, Chang D, Yang F, et al. Profiling early humoral
response to diagnose novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Clin Infect Dis.
71. Patrick DM, Petric M, Skowronski MD, Guasparini R, Booth FT, Krajden
M, et al. An outbreak of human coronavirus OC43 infection and serological
cross-reactivity with SARS coronavirus. Canad J Infect Dis Med Microbiol.
72. Theel ES, Slev P, Wheeler S, Couturier RM, Wong JS, Kadkhoda K. The role
of antibody testing for SARS-CoV-2: is there one? J Clin Microbiol. (2020).
COVID-19 Clinical and Immune Spectra
targets for immune responses to SARS-CoV-2. Cell Host Microbe. (2020)
Janice Oh HL, Ken-En GS, Bertoletti A, Tan YJ. Understanding the T cell
immune response in SARS coronavirus infection. Emerg Microbes Infect.
Wang SF, Chen HK, Chen M, Li YW, Chen JY, Tsao HC, et al. Humanleukocyte antigen class I Cw 1502 and class II DR 0301 genotypes are
associated with resistance to severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)
Xiong P, Zeng X, Song SM, Jia WS, Zhong HM, Xiao LL, et al.
Lack of association between HLA-A, -B and -DRB1 alleles and the
development of SARS: a cohort of 95 SARS-recovered individuals in a
population of Guangdong, southern China. Int J Immunogenet. (2008)
Lin M, Tseng KH, Trejaut AJ, Lee LH, Loo HJ, Chu CC, et al. Association of
HLA class I with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection.
Ng MH, Cheng HS, Lau MK, Leung MG, Khoo SU, Zee CB, et al.
Immunogenetics in SARS: a case-control study. Hong Kong Med J.
Ng MH, Lau MK, Li L, Cheng HS, Chan YW, Hui KP, et al.
Association of human-leukocyte-antigen class I (B∗ 0703) and class
II (DRB1∗ 0301) genotypes with susceptibility and resistance to the
development of severe acute respiratory syndrome. J Infect Dis. (2004)
Ding Y, Wang H, Shen H, Li Z, Geng J, Han H, et al. The clinical pathology
of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS): a report from China. J Pathol.
Ng DL, Al FH, Keating KM, Gerber IS, Jones LT, Metcalfe GM,
et al. Clinicopathologic, immunohistochemical, and ultrastructural
findings of a fatal case of middle east respiratory syndrome
coronavirus infection in the United Arab Emirates. Am J Pathol. (2016)
Xu Z, Shi L, Wang Y, Zhang J, Huang L, Zhang C, et al. Pathological findings
of COVID-19 associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome. Lancet
Mehta P, McAuley FD, Brown M, Sanchez E, Tattersall SR, Manson JJ.
COVID-19: consider cytokine storm syndromes and immunosuppression.
Pedersen SF, Ho YC. SARS-CoV-2: a storm is raging. J Clin Invest. (2020)
Hirano T, Murakami M. COVID-19: a new virus, but a familiar
receptor and cytokine release syndrome. Immunity. (2020) 52:731–
Channappanavar R, Perlman S. Pathogenic human coronavirus infections:
causes and consequences of cytokine storm and immunopathology. Semin
Qin C, Zhou L, Hu Z, Zhang S, Yang S, Tao Y. Dysregulation of immune
response in patients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China. Clin Infect Dis.
Lei L, Qian H, Zhou X, Zhang X, Zhang D, Dai T, et al. The
phenotypic changes of gd T cells in COVID-19 patients. medRxiv.
Zhou Y, Fu B, Zheng X, Wang D, Zhao C, Qi Y, et al. Pathogenic T cells and
inflammatory monocytes incite inflammatory storm in severe COVID-19
Bordoni V, Sacchi A, Cimini E, Notari S, Grassi G, Tartaglia E, et al. An
inflammatory profile correlates with decreased frequency of cytotoxic cells
of print].
Wan S, Yi Q, Fan S, Lv J, Zhang X, Guo L, et al. Characteristics of
lymphocyte subsets and cytokines in peripheral blood of 123 hospitalized
patients with 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia (NCP). medRxiv.
Liu T, Zhang J, Yang Y, Ma H, Li Z, Zhang J, et al. The potential role
of IL-6 in monitoring severe case of coronavirus disease 2019. medRxiv.
113. Xu X, Han M, Li T, Sun W, Wang D, Fu B, et al. Effective treatment of
severe COVID-19 patients with tocilizumab. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. (2020)
114. Thevarajan I, Nguyen OHT, Koutsakos M, Druce J, Caly L, van de Sandt
CE, et al. Breadth of concomitant immune responses prior to patient
recovery: a case report of non-severe COVID-19. Nat Med. (2020) 26:453–
115. Ong EZ, Chan ZFY, Leong YW, Lee YMN, Kalimuddin S, Mohideen HMS,
et al. A dynamic immune response shapes COVID-19 progression. Cell Host
116. Shaw AC, Goldstein RD, Montgomery RR. Age-dependent dysregulation of
117. Nikolich-Zugich J. Aging of the T cell compartment in mice and humans:
from no naive expectations to foggy memories. Jf Immunol. (2014) 193:2622–
118. Goldberg EL, Dixit VD. Drivers of age-related inflammation and
strategies for healthspan extension. Immunological Rev. (2015) 265:63–
119. Lasry A, Ben-Neriah Y. Senescence-associated inflammatory
responses: aging and cancer perspectives. Trends Immunol. (2015)
120. Goronzy JJ, Fang F, Cavanagh MM, Qi Q, Weyand CM. Naive T cell
maintenance and function in human aging. J Immunol. (2015) 194:4073–
121. Canan CH, Gokhale SN, Carruthers B, Lafuse PW, Schlesinger SL,
Torrelles BJ, et al. Characterization of lung inflammation and its
impact on macrophage function in aging. J Leuk Biol. (2014) 96:473–
122. Lin L, Lu L, Cao W, Li T. Hypothesis for potential pathogenesis
patients with viral pneumonia. Emerg Microb Infect. (2020)
123. Zhao J, Alshukairi NA, Baharoon AS, Ahmed AW, Bokhari AA, Nehdi
MA, et al. Recovery from the Middle East respiratory syndrome is
associated with antibody and T-cell responses. Sci Immunol. (2017)
cases and a better prognosis than adults. Acta Paediatr. (2020) 109:1088–
125. Brodin P. Why is COVID-19 so mild in children? Acta Paediatr. (2020)
126. Thome JJ, Yudanin N, Ohmura Y, Kubota M, Grinshpun B, Sathaliyawala T,
et al. Spatial map of human T cell compartmentalization and maintenance
127. Xiong Y, Liu Y, Cao L, Wang D, Guo M, Jiang A, et al. Transcriptomic
characteristics of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and peripheral blood
mononuclear cells in COVID-19 patients. Emerg Microbes Infect. (2020)
128. Liao M, Liu Y, Yuan J, Wen Y, Xu G, Zhao J, et al. The landscape of
129. Zhou Z, Ren L, Zhang L, Zhong J, Xiao Y, Jia Z, et al. Heightened
innate immune responses in the respiratory tract of COVID-19 patients.
130. Sanders JM, Monogue LM, Jodlowski ZT, Cutrell JB. Pharmacologic
131. Casadevall A, Pirofski LA. The convalescent sera option for containing
132. Chen L, Xiong J, Bao L, Shi Y. Convalescent plasma as a
potential therapy for COVID-19. Lancet Infect Dis. (2020)
COVID-19 Clinical and Immune Spectra
138. Zhu FC, Li HY, Guan HX, Hou HL, Wang JW, Li XJ, et al. Safety, tolerability,
and immunogenicity of a recombinant adenovirus type-5 vectored COVID19 vaccine: a dose-escalation, open-label, non-randomised, first-in-human
139. Green DR. SARS-CoV2 vaccines: slow is fast. Sci Adv. (2020) eabc7428.
133. Shen C, Wang Z, Zhao F, Yang Y, Li J, Yuan J, et al. Treatment of 5 critically Ill
patients with COVID-19 with convalescent plasma. JAMA. (2020) 323:1582–
134. O’Brien TR, Thomas LD, Jackson SS, Prokunina-Olsson L, Donnelly
PR, Hartmann R. Weak induction of interferon expression by SARSCoV-2 supports clinical trials of interferon lambda to treat early
of print].
135. Sallard E, Lescure XF, Yazdanpanah Y, Mentre F, Peiffer-Smadja N. Type 1
interferons as a potential treatment against COVID-19. Antiviral Res. (2020)
136. Patterson BK, Seethamraju H, Dhody K, Corley JM, Kazempour K, Lalezari
PJ, et al. Disruption of the CCL5/RANTES-CCR5 pathway restores immune
homeostasis and reduces plasma viral load in critical COVID-19. medRxiv.
137. Amanat F, Krammer F. SARS-CoV-2 vaccines: status report. Immunity.
potential conflict of interest.
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
