ORIGINAL ARTICLE Personal Protective Equipment in the coronavirus
pandemic: training with Rapid Cycle Deliberate  Practice  Equipa‐
mento de Proteo Individual na pandemia por coronavrus: treinamen‐
to com Prtica Deliberada em Ciclos  Rpidos  Equipo  de  Proteccin
Personal  en  pandemia  de coronavirus: entrenamiento con Prctica
Deliberada en Ciclos Rpidos Hudson  Carmo  de  OliveiraI  Lucimar
Casimiro  de  SouzaI,II  Taina  Coutinho LeiteI,III Juliana Faria
CamposI Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro. Rio  de  Janeiro,
Rio  de  Janeiro, Brazil Hospital Samaritano. Rio de Janeiro, Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil Hospital Pr‐Cardaco. Rio de  Janeiro,  Rio  de
Janeiro,  Brazil Oliveira HC, Souza LC, Leite TC, Campos JF. Per‐
sonal Protective Equipment in the coronavirus pandemic:  training
with  Rapid  Cycle Deliberate Practice.  Hudson Carmo de Oliveira
Objective: to discuss the application of Rapid  Cycle  Deliberate
Practice  for  attire  and  unattire  training  in the context of
COVID‐19 and structure a practical guide to  the  application  at
this juncture. Methods: this methodological study described theo‐
retical and practical aspects of the application of a  simulation
strategy  as  a technological training tool. An application guide
Results: maximizing time in Deliberate  Practice,  feedback  with
evidence  and  psychological  security are the principles of this
strategy. The dynamic involves repetition and feedback.  The  ap‐
plication  guide  presents the sequence of actions for attire and
unattire. Final considerations: coping  with  this  pandemic  re‐
quires  appropriate  use  of personal protective educational tool
for attire/unattire, since  it  encourages  mastery  performance.
Descriptors:  Simulation Training; Personal Protective Equipment;
Covid‐19; Pandemics; Containment of Biohazards.  Objetivo: discu‐
tir  a  aplicao  da  Prtica  Deliberada  em  Ciclos Rpidos para o
treinamento de paramentao e desparamentao no contexto da COVID‐19
e estruturar um guia prtico para a aplicao nesta conjuntura. Mto‐
dos: estudo metodolgico que descreve aspectos tericos  e  prticos
da aplicao de uma estratgia de simulao na qualidade de ferramenta
tecnolgica de treinamento. Um guia de  aplicao  foi  construdo  a
partir  da busca de evidncias provenientes dos principais rgos de
autoridade em sade do Brasil. Resultados: maximizao do  tempo  em
Prtica Deliberada, feedback com evidncia e segurana psicolgica so
os princpios desta estratgia. A dinmica envolve repeties e  feed‐
backs.  O  guia de aplicao apresenta a sequncia de aes para para‐
mentao e desparamentao. Consideraes finais: o enfrentamento desta
pandemia requer uso apropriado de Equipamento de Proteo Individu‐
al. Os autores sugerem a Prtica Deliberada em Ciclos Rpidos  como
ferramenta  educacional tecnolgica para paramentao/desparamentao,
visto que incentiva uma performance com  maestria.   Descritores:
Treinamento por Simulao; Equipamento de Proteo Individual; Coron‐
avrus; Pandemia; Conteno de Riscos Biolgicos.  EDITOR  IN  CHIEF:
Dulce  Barbosa ASSOCIATE EDITOR: Antonio Jos de Almeida Filho Ob‐
jetivo: discutir la aplicacin de la Prctica Deliberada en  Ciclos
Rpidos para la formacin de vestimentas y depargaciones en el con‐
texto de COVID‐19 y estructurar una gua prctica para la aplicacin
en  esta  coyuntura. Mtodos: estudio metodolgico que describe as‐
pectos tericos y prcticos de la aplicacin de  una  estrategia  de
simulacin  como herramienta de capacitacin tecnolgica. Se cre una
gua de aplicacin a partir de la bsqueda de evidencia de las prin‐
cipales  autoridades de salud en Brasil. Resultados: maximizar el
tiempo en la prctica deliberada, la  retroalimentacin  basada  en
evidencia  y  la  seguridad psicolgica son los principios de esta
estrategia. La  dinmica  implica  repeticiones  y  retroalimenta‐
ciones.  La  gua  de  aplicacin presenta la secuencia de acciones
para vestirse y vestirse. Consideraciones finales: enfrentar esta
pandemia requiere el uso apropiado de Equipo de Proteccin Person‐
al.  Los autores sugieren la prctica deliberada en ciclos  rpidos
como  una  herramienta  educativa tecnolgica para vestirse/desve‐
stirse, ya que fomenta un desempeo magistral.  Descriptores:  En‐
trenamiento  Simulado; Equipo de Proteccin Personal; Coronavirus;
Pandemia; Contencin de Riesgos  Biolgicos.   Personal  Protective
Equipment  in the coronavirus pandemic: training with Rapid Cycle
Deliberate Practice Oliveira HC, Souza LC, Leite TC,  Campos  JF.
The  Coronavirus  Disease  epidemic (COVID‐19), caused by the new
coronavirus (Sars‐CoV‐2), originated  in  2019  in  the  city  of
Wuhan,  China. In early 2020 it became a pandemic as it hit 24 to
nearly two million people infected and nearly 130 thousand deaths
caused  by  the virus. The countries most affected by coronavirus
disease are the United States, with more than 600  thousand  con‐
firmed  cases;  Italy,  Spain, Germany and France, with more than
100 thousand confirmed cases each; United Kingdom, with more than
98  thousand  cases;  and  China, with more than 80 thousand con‐
firmed cases. Among those mentioned, all have a rate of  contami‐
nation  of  health  professionals(1).  Italy,  for  instance, had
14,032 cases of contamination  of  these  professionals,  with  a
lethality  rate  of  11.8%  of those aged between 70 and 79 years
old, and 1.3% among those aged 60‐69 years old(2).  Since it is a
respiratory  transmission  virus,  personal  protective equipment
(PPE) use is essential to contemplate the  standard  precautions,
contact  and  droplet  measures  recommended to face this pandem‐
ic(3). Therefore, an investment in knowledge, training and quali‐
fication  of health professionals on proper use of this equipment
in care management of infected  patients  becomes  indispensable.
Proper attire and unattire are an effective way to avoid contami‐
nation among health professionals(4).  A strategy to achieve  the
proper use of this equipment, as well as the protection of health
professionals, is the implementation and compliance  with  strict
PPE  protocols. In 2014, during the Ebola outbreak, contamination
of two health professionals was associated with probable non‐com‐
pliance  with  these  protocols. A study found that approximately
half of the  sample  of  health  professionals  touched,  without
gloves,  a potentially contaminated PPE surface and about 26% in‐
appropriately touched the front of the mask(5), which  shows  the
inappropriate  disposal  of PPE.  Research shows that all profes‐
sionals without updating and who do not practice  repeatedly  end
in  stagnant skills or deviations in techniques, over time(6). In
addition, prolonged periods of non‐use of skills, known as reten‐
tion  intervals,  lead to a decline in performance(6). That said,
it is significant that health services provide training  for  all
professionals  who  will have or may have contact with people in‐
fected with the new However, conventional training  using  demon‐
strations  does not guarantee that the professional will be prop‐
erly and unparalleled. A study on training and education, in  the
context  of  highly  infectious  diseases, in emergency services,
showed that professionals felt the need for quality training  and
lack  of  sufficient  confidence to respond to these diseases(7).
Therefore, it is necessary to conduct training that allows  prac‐
tical  implementation of appropriate technique among all partici‐
pants, in favor of minimizing technical errors, a fact  that  im‐
plies  a reduction in the risk of contamination of health profes‐
sionals.  Rapid Cycle Deliberate Practice (RCDP) is a  simulation
strategy  aimed  at improving participants performance to achieve
mastery in a skill. It is organized to  promote  task  repetition
and provide immediate evidence‐based feedback through an instruc‐
tor.  Created in a setting of pediatric cardiorespiratory arrest,
RCDP  showed  improvement  in  the  cardiopulmonary resuscitation
skills of health professionals(8).  By  assuming  that  the  RCDP
should  be  applied  as a technological tool in other populations
and in different contexts of skills, the present  study  suggests
RCDP use in capacity building and training of attire and unattire
of PPE.  Thus, health professionals  will  perform  with  mastery
when  facing  COVID‐19. RCDP is an educational technology with an
immediate impact on the improvement and technical improvement  of
health  professionals, meeting the current demand for information
in the health setting.  To discuss the application of Rapid Cycle
Deliberate  Practice  for  training in attire and unattire and to
structure a practical guide to the application of RCDP in  attire
and unattire of PPE in procedures that generate aerosolization in
the context of COVID‐19.  This methodological  study  was  struc‐
tured  in two parts: 1) Explanation of the theoretical and opera‐
tional aspects for the applicability of the RCDP  in  attire  and
removing  the  necessary  PPE  for  procedures  that may generate
aerosols, in the context of coping with the COVID‐19 pandemic; 2)
Construction  of  a  RCDP application guide at this juncture.  To
construct the guide, relevant information was gathered for attire
and  unattire  the  PPE necessary to face COVID‐19. The data were
extracted from the main official materials released by the  agen‐
cies  linked  to  the  Brazilian health area, such as Ministry of
Health, Brazilian National Health Surveillance Agency (Agncia Na‐
cional  de Vigilncia Sanitria, abbreviated Anvisa), Federal Nurs‐
ing Council (Conselho Federal de Enfermagem, abbreviated  COFEN),
and  Regional  Nursing  Council (Conselho Regional de Enfermagem,
abbreviated COREN). From the data collected,  the  best  evidence
and  recommendations in force were selected.  Respecting the RCDP
principles, the guide was built in five cycles, with specific ob‐
jectives.  The  first  two cycles refer to proper attire, and the
next three refer to unattire. Each cycle contains three to eleven
tasks  considered  to  be critical points, which are points whose
errors would lead to  potential  contamination.  The  cycles  and
stages  were  named as follows: Cycle 1 refers to the first stage
of unattire, Cycle 2 to the second stage of attire,  Cycle  3  to
Unattire  stage  I,  Cycle  4 to Unattire stage II and Cycle 5 to
Unattire stage III.  THEORICAL ASPECTS OF RAPID CYCLE  DELIBERATE
PRACTICE  Deliberate  Practice  is  a concept based on studies on
skill acquisition. It was coined by Ericsson et al. in their  re‐
search on expertise. It is defined as a series of specific activ‐
ities that improve the performance of individuals by  being  sub‐
jected  to  the  following factors: a) task with a defined objec‐
tive; b) motivation to improve; c) feedbacks; and d) vast  oppor‐
tunity  for  repetition and gradual refinement of performance(9).
Rapid Cycle Deliberate Practice is a simulation strategy  created
by  Hunt  et  al.  in  2014, Personal Protective Equipment in the
coronavirus pandemic: training with Rapid Cycle Deliberate  Prac‐
tice Oliveira HC, Souza LC, Leite TC, Campos JF.  which appropri‐
ated the concept of Deliberate Practice and added an intense  and
rapid  transition  between  feedbacks and task practice in an ex‐
plored clinical case until the skill was mastered.  This alterna‐
tion was dubbed the fast cycle(8).  For the proper application of
the RCDP, one must be aware of its three  basic  principles.  The
first  is called maximizing time in deliberate practice, in which
it is recommended to give several opportunities  to  perform  the
task  perfectly. The idea is to seek to achieve automatization in
performance through repetition, i.e. to create muscle  memory  to
do  the  right thing. For this to be possible, it is necessary to
receive corrections from an instructor, in case there is an error
in the performance. These corrections are with evidence(8).  RCDP
feedbacks are classified as directed and immediate. They are pro‐
vided after an error is detected. Thus, it is understood that the
instructor will make interruptions to explain the most  appropri‐
ate way to perform that task, according to the existing scientif‐
ic evidence, or even from the consensus of  experts.  This  means
that  coaches  need  to master the training topic, in addition to
possessing ownership and confidence in  the  application  of  the
RCDP.  After  feedback, participants are asked to go back 10 sec‐
onds and perform the task again(8). In case of an  error,  a  new
block  is  performed, creating a quick cycle between task, inter‐
ruption and feedback. The dynamics  of  interruptions  can  Doing
again Going back Cycle Deliberate Practice In order for these in‐
terruptions to be accepted favorably and to prevent  participants
from  behaving  defensively, it is necessary to ensure a partner‐
ship agreement between coach and  participant.   Training  should
not  be  started  without an understanding that interruptions are
essential to achieving mastery performance. It is noteworthy that
Hunt et al. call this style as coaching(8) . With this, the third
principle is explicit psychological security.  RAPID CYCLE DELIB‐
ERATE  PRACTICE OPERATING ASPECTS IN THE ATTIRE AND UNATTIRE Hav‐
ing understood the three principles of the RCDP, the training dy‐
namics  is discussed. A minimum of two and a maximum of five par‐
ticipants are suggested. The first action of RCDP training is  to
ensure  psychological  security.  At this point, the trainer must
explain the dynamics of the simulation. He/she should stress that
his/her  role  is to help participants improve their performance,
in order to create  muscle  memory  to  perform  the  attire  and
unattire  without  errors  and  that  this will bring benefits to
avoid contamination by Sars‐CoV‐2. He/she must also inform  about
the  possibility of several interruptions necessary to hear feed‐
back, but which will be resumed immediately after  the  feedback,
taking into account the explanations given. All of these instruc‐
tions must be verbally welcoming and charismatic,  in  accordance
with  the  RCDPs own coaching style.  When guaranteeing the third
principle of the RCDP, the trainer demonstrates  all  the  equip‐
ment,  inputs  and items existing in the simulation and chooses a
participant to start the setting (or decide together). The train‐
er  then  narrates  the  clinical  case and declares the start of
training. The chosen one begins to carry out the activities.  The
other  participants  are positioned on the sides so that they can
hear feedback. In case of a critical error, participants are  in‐
terrupted.  At this point, immediate and targeted feedback should
take place. Targeted feedback means that the  trainer  must  make
the  information  explicit,  always  based  on  the best evidence
available. This proved to be more efficient than encouraging par‐
ticipants to try to answer or look for the answer(8).  This is an
interesting aspect of RCDP, since in  the  scope  of  simulation,
some techniques, such as debriefing, encourage selfperception and
self‐reflection, in which the facilitator exercises the  function
of  guiding  thinking  so  that participants and their group find
their conclusions. RCDP goes against the grain, as  it  does  not
aim at reflective debates, but focuses on task repetition, aiming
at the creation of muscular memory to act  with  mastery.  There‐
fore,  it  is essential to provide explicit evidence for partici‐
pants to receive it, understand  its  importance  and  return  to
practice  as  soon  as possible.  To exemplify the targeted feed‐
back, one can imagine a situation in which participants forget to
mold the nose support on the respiratory protection mask. In this
case, the trainer must say It is necessary to mold  the  nose  on
the mask so that the correct sealing occurs, according to Anvisas
Technical Note 4 of 2020. If participants  keep  the  error,  the
trainer  interrupts  them by saying Lets stop, go back 10 seconds
and try again(8).  Participants who started training continue  to
train and receive feedback until the end of the first cycle. Upon
completing it perfectly, the  initiator  takes  his/her  position
with another participant, taking the place of observer. This hap‐
pens until everyone has completed the first cycle.  This  dynamic
is repeated until the end of the training. It is worth mentioning
that before starting any cycle, the participants of the turn must
perform  all  the  tasks  of the first cycle and proceed with the
second and so on. Participants must always start in the first cy‐
cle.   Personal Protective Equipment in the coronavirus pandemic:
training with Rapid Cycle Deliberate Practice Oliveira HC,  Souza
LC,  Leite TC, Campos JF.  RAPID CYCLE DELIBERATE PRACTICE APPLI‐
CATION GUIDE Chart 1 ‐ Guide to Rapid Cycle  Deliberate  Practice
in attire and unattire for professionals who work less than 1 me‐
ter from the suspected or confirmed patient with the  new  coron‐
avirus  infection and who perform procedures with risk of aerosol
generation Disposing in infectious garbage; Hand hygiene with 70%
alcohol  for 20 to 30 seconds; Cycle 5 ‐ Unattire Stage III Going
outside the room or antechamber (without surgical gown and  Cycle
1  ‐  Attire  stage  I Hand hygiene with 70% alcohol for 20 to 30
seconds; Hand hygiene; Removing the  cap  by  the  inner  region;
Wearing surgical gown; Disposing in infectious garbage; Tying the
surgical gown properly (so it doesnt fall  off  );  Hand  hygiene
with  70% alcohol for 20 to 30 seconds; Cycle 2 ‐ Attire stage II
Removing safety glasses or face shield (covering  the  front  and
side  of  the face, holding from the sides and supporting it on a
surface*2); Assessing conditions* of the  respiratory  protection
mask  (particulate up to 0.3 (N95, N99, N100, PFF2 or PFF3); Hand
hygiene; (In the case of a new mask) Holding the outside  in  the
shape  of  a cup and approaching the nose and mouth; Removing the
mask by the side elastics  without  touching  the  inner  surface
(NEVER  holding the front of the mask). Pulling in the upperante‐
rior direction; (In case of already used mask) Putting on  gloves
before holding by the Packing the mask in a paper envelope*3 with
the elastics out, to facilitate the removal of the mask; With the
other hand, directing the elastics of the mask to the back of the
head, one at a time; Hand hygiene; Shaping the nose support; Per‐
forming sealing test of the respiratory protection mask; (In case
of already used mask) Removing the glove, discarding it and  hand
hygiene;  Putting safety glasses or face shield, which covers the
front and side of the face; Putting on cap; Going to the room  or
area  where  the  patient  is;  Hand hygiene with 70% alcohol for
20‐30 seconds; Cycle 3 ‐ Unattire Stage I  Not  leaving  the  pa‐
tients  room;  Removing  gloves by pulling the first one from the
outside of the wrist with the fingers of the opposite hand; Hold‐
ing  the  removed  glove with the other gloved hand; Touching the
inside of the gloved hands wrist with the opposite  index  finger
(without  gloves)  and  removing  the  other glove; Disposing the
glove in infectious waste; Hand  hygiene  with  70%  alcohol  for
20‐30  seconds; Cycle 4 ‐ Unattire Stage II Untying the bottom of
the surgical gown; Untying the top of the surgical gown,  keeping
your  hand  in  the  Holding  the  surgical gown from the inside;
Pulling it in  the  anterior‐inferior  direction  (extending  the
forearms);  With  the right hand, holding the surgical gown close
to the wrist of the left hand; Pulling the left  hand;  With  the
left  hand,  holding  the surgical gown close to the wrist of the
right hand; Pulling the right hand; At  the  end  of  separation,
wearing gloves to clean the safety glasses or the face shield and
the area where they were supported.   Note:  *1Inspect  mask  in‐
tegrity  (damp,  dirty,  torn,  dented or creased masks cannot be
used) and make sure that strips, nasal bridge and nasal foam  ma‐
terial  are not degraded(4); *2 Safety glasses should be used ex‐
clusively by each professional, should be cleaned with water  and
soap  and  then  disinfected  with  70%  liquid  alcohol,  sodium
hypochlorite or another disinfectant recommended by the  manufac‐
turer(4);  *3Plastic  or  other materials can be used, as long as
they are not hermetically sealed. Never place the used mask in  a
closed plastic bag, as it may become damp and potentially contam‐
inated(4).  FINAL CONSIDERATIONS in the attire  and  unattire  of
the personal protective equipment needed to cope with coronavirus
disease (COVID‐19). This theme is  different  from  the  original
context  of  creating the RCDP strategy.  It was carried out in a
pediatric cardiopulmonary resuscitation encourage research to  be
carried out to test the applicability of RCDP in other situations
and institutions. Due to the Sars‐CoV‐2 pandemic and the  growing
need  for quality training in attire and unattire, we suggest the
RCDP strategy as a technological tool in the  educational  field.
It  must  be  applied  to  train health professionals in order to
achieve mastery in the skill of attire, avoiding contamination by
the  virus.  Due to the emergency situation of COVID‐19, in addi‐
tion to the discussion as to the applicability  of  the  RCDP  in
vesting  and creating the RCDP application guide. Adjustments can
be made in this guide both to meet the reality  of  the  institu‐
tions and to to the validation of the guide by specialists. It is
suggested that clinical studies be conducted to generate concrete
results  on  the applicability of RCDP in this perspective.  Aca‐
demic Excellence Program of Coordination of Superior Level  Staff
Improvement  ‐  Ministry of Education of Brazil.  Holding the in‐
side of the surgical gown and fold it; To be  continued  Personal
Protective  Equipment  in the coronavirus pandemic: training with
Rapid Cycle Deliberate Practice Oliveira HC, Souza LC, Leite  TC,
Campos  JF.   World Health Organization. Coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID‐19) Situation report ‐87 [Internet]. 2020[cited  2020  May
02].  Available from: Task force COVID‐19 del Dipartimento Malat‐
tie Infettive e Servizio di Informatica,  Istituto  Superiore  di
Sanit.  Epidemia  COVID‐19,  Holland  M, Zaloga DJ, Friderici CS.
COVID‐19: Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) for  the  emergency
physician. Vis J Emerg Med.  Ministrio da Sade (BR). Anvisa. Nota
Tcnica n 04/2020. Orientaes para servios de sade: medidas de pre‐
veno  e  controle que devem ser adotadas durante a assistncia aos
casos suspeitos ou confirmados de  infeco  pelo  novo  coronavrus
Kantor  J.  Behavioral considerations and impact on personal pro‐
tective equipment (PPE) use: Early lessons from  the  coronavirus
(COVID‐19)  LE  AB,  Buehler  SA, Maniscalco PM, Lane P, Rupp LE,
Ernest E, et al. Determining training and  education  needs  per‐
taining to highly infectious disease preparedness and response: a
gap analysis survey of US emergency medical services  practition‐
ers.  Am  J  Infect  Control.  Hunt EA, Duval‐Arnould JM, Nelson‐
McMillan KL, Bradshaw JH, Diener‐West M, Perretta JS, et al.  Pe‐
diatric resident resuscitation skills











































