Rev. Latino‐Am. Enfermagem Which curve provides the best explana‐
tion of the growth in confirmed COVID‐19 cases in Chile?*   Vctor
Daz‐Narvez1 David San‐Martn‐Roldn2 Aracelis Calzadilla‐Nez3 Pablo
San‐Martn‐Roldn4 that could explain the epidemiological  behavior
of  the infection by COVID‐19 and derive the possible causes that
contribute to explain the corresponding model and  the  Alexander
Parody‐Muoz5  Gonzalo  Robledo‐Veloso  Objective:  to explore the
best type of curve or trend model health implications that can be
inferred.  Method:  data were collected from the COVID‐19 reports
of the Department of Epidemiology,  Ministry  of  Health,  Chile.
Curve  adjustment  studies  were  developed with the data in four
different  models:  quadratic,  exponential,  simple  exponential
smoothing,  and  double  exponential  smoothing. The significance
level used was 0.05. Results: the curve that best fits the evolu‐
tion  of  the accumulated confirmed cases of COVID‐19 in Chile is
the doubly‐smoothed exponential curve. Conclusion: the number  of
infected  patients  will  continue  to  increase.  Chile needs to
Health Context.  Universidad Andres Bello, Facultad de  Odontolo‐
ga,  Santiago,  Chile.  and control measures. The behavior of the
population plays a fundamental role. We suggest not relaxing  re‐
strictions  and  Universidad  de Valparaso, Facultad de Medicina,
Escuela further improving epidemiological surveillance. Emergency
de  Obstetricia  y  Puericultura, Valparaso, Chile.  preparations
are needed and more resource elements need  Universidad  Bernardo
OHiggins,  Facultad  de  Salud, Santiago, Chile.  remain vigilant
and adjust the strategies around the prevention Universidad  May‐
or, Facultad de Ciencias, Escuela de Nutricin y Diettica, Santia‐
go, Chile.  Universidad  Metropolitana,  Barranquilla,  Colombia.
Universidad de Chile, Facultad de Ciencias, Santiago, to be added
to the current health support. This prediction is provisional and
depends on keeping all intervening variables constant. Any alter‐
ation will modify the prediction.  Descriptors: COVID‐19;  Coron‐
avirus; 2019‐nCoV; Coronavirus Infections; Pandemics; Epidemiolo‐
gy.  Daz‐Narvez V,  San‐Martn‐Roldn  D,  Calzadilla‐Nez  A,  San‐
Martn‐Roldn  P, Parody‐Muoz A, Robledo‐Veloso G. Which curve pro‐
vides the best explanation of the growth  in  confirmed  COVID‐19
cases  in Chile?. Rev. Latino‐Am. Enfermagem. 2020;28:e3346. [Ac‐
cess  ___  __  ____];  month  day  Rev.   Latino‐Am.   Enfermagem
2020;28:e3346.   formulate  effective control strategies. The ob‐
jective is to know what type of curve or model can  best  explain
the  The rising pneumonia called COVID‐19, caused epidemiological
behavior of the accumulated  confirmed  by  SARS‐CoV‐2,  exhibits
strong  infectivity  but  less cases of COVID‐19 and identify the
possible causes that virulence when compared  to  SARS‐CoV‐1  and
MERS‐CoV contribute to explain the corresponding model and the in
terms of morbidity and mortality. It is not only a  virus  health
implications  that can be inferred.  that spreads from one person
to another, but probably spreads because many people  become  in‐
fected  in various places through different mechanisms. Restrict‐
ing the movement of people, reducing contact, disseminating  Data
were  collected from the COVID‐19 reports key high‐frequency pre‐
vention information through from the Department  of  Epidemiology
of  the  Ministry  of Health in Chile (MINSAL). The data are pub‐
licly to respond quickly to the contingency, can help contain the
pandemic(1‐5).   The actual number of infected cases is much with
the data in four different  models:  quadratic(13),  larger  than
that  reported worldwide. The observed exponential(13‐14), simple
exponential smoothing using the mortality rate of COVID‐19 is es‐
timated  at around 4.8% formula [Ft = F (t‐1) +   A(t‐1)] , where
Ft = new prognosis, worldwide.  Although  this  rate  is  low  in
Chile, this estimate may be incorrect due to underestimation, be‐
cause earlier prognosis and double  exponential  smoothing  using
Holts  method  with trend adjustment [FITt = Ft + severe cases is
higher and, as active cases increase,  Tt];  where  FITt  is  the
forecasted  value];  the  components  the health resources do not
support the demand and of this  formula  are:  [Ft=F(t‐1)  +   (A
overestimation,  considering  that  the  vast majority of y [Tt =
(Ft  F cases without symptoms or with mild symptoms are not esti‐
mated:  the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE); the mean abso‐
lute deviation (MAD); the mean squared =  earlier  prognosis  and
A(t‐1)  =  actual value of the The COVID‐19 pandemic is an impor‐
tant international deviation (MSD). Criterion  for  choosing  the
best  curve: test for the medical and scientific community, as it
small error coefficients. Indicator  is the  weighting  used  re‐
veals  weaknesses in the management of emerging in the level com‐
ponent of the smoothened estimate and viral diseases and  reminds
us that contagious diseases
 is the weighting used in the trend component of the should never
be underestimated. In addition, it has smoothened estimate (simi‐
lar  to  a  moving  average of strained health systems due to the
virulence and excess the differences between consecutive observa‐
tions)(15‐16).   demand  on  hospitals  To  adjust  the  level of
smoothing of the data (elimination It is essential to  understand
the  transmission  of  irregular fluctuations), the optimal ARIMA
model was dynamics  of  the  infection,  as  it  could  determine
whether used for weighting, minimizing the sum of the square out‐
break  control  measures  are  exerting  a  significant   effect.
residues(18‐19).  The absolute error of each measure was The num‐
bers of newly infected cases largely depend on the the difference
() between the actual observed value effectiveness of the control
measures. Several governments and the  predicted  value  of  con‐
firmed cases for the same have rapidly incorporated recent scien‐
tific findings into day. The median and interquartile range  were
estimated  public  policies  at  community, regional and national
levels to after checking for the normality of the absolute errors
slow  down  and/or prevent the further spread of COVID‐19.  using
the Kolmogorov‐Smirnov test. Minitab 18.0 Control  measures  such
as  quarantine,  travel  restrictions and airport inspections for
travellers have been widely implemented to contain the spread  of
infections.  The  software  was  used. The significance level was
0.05.  effectiveness of these containment measures to control the
outbreak is inconclusive though(1,3,5‐6,11).  It is advisable for
government entities to report regression  equations  of  the  ob‐
served  data  curves  of  on the current state of the pandemic in
daily reports, confirmed, adjusted and  predicted  cases  in  the
quadratic,  exponential,  simple exponential smoothing and double
COVID‐19. Statistics need to be read carefully  though,  exponen‐
tial  smoothing  models.  The  MAD, MAPE, and as it is leading to
massive panic without organized MSD coefficients are lower in the
double exponential solutions related to the redistribution of re‐
sources(12).  smoothing curve, which shows that  the  curve  that
best   Understanding   the   epidemiological  characteristics  of
COVID‐19 transmission in Chile is essential to fits the evolution
of  the  accumulated  confirmed cases of COVID‐19 in Chile is the
one described above.  Daz‐Narvez V, San‐Martn‐Roldn D,  Calzadil‐
la‐Nez  A,  San‐Martn‐Roldn  P,  Parody‐Muoz A, Robledo‐Veloso G.
Exactness measures Accumulated confirmed cases  Accumulated  con‐
firmed  cases  Exactness  measures  Day/Month Year 2020 Day/Month
Year 2020 Figura 1  Simple exponential smoothing model Figura 1**
Double  exponential  smoothing model Smoothing constant Exactness
measures Casos confirmados acumulados Accumulated confirmed cases
Smoothing   constant   Exactness  measures  Day/Month  Year  2020
Day/Month Year 2020 the model. Chile, 2020 predicted value on the
previous  day of confirmed cases results of the forecasted number
of confirmed cases (with its corresponding  confidence  interval)
and the from March 3rd, 2020 to August 30th, 2020. The MAPE actu‐
al result of confirmed cases that occurred  on  the  coefficients
are  the  lowest in the double exponential predicted day. The re‐
sults of actual confirmed cases smoothing curve and the  same  is
true  for  the  MAD differ little from the predicted value (S‐W =
0.907; median = 53.2 and interquartile range= 72.80) and, As  ob‐
served,  the  confidence  intervals  increase as with some excep‐
tions, the actual value was within the  predicted  further  ahead
and,  therefore, the estimation estimated confidence interval for
the predicted day.  error  increases(18).   confidence  interval)
and  the  actual  result  of confirmed cases that occurred on the
predicted day, using the  double  exponential  smoothing  method.
Chile,  2020  Prognosis  [*95%  CI]  Rev.  Latino‐Am.  Enfermagem
2020;28:e3346.  Prognosis [*95% CI] Accumulated  confirmed  cases
*CI  =  Confidence  interval; CC = Confirmed cases Smoothing con‐
stants Exactness measures Day/Month Year * IP = prediction inter‐
val;  MAPE  = Mean absolute percentage error; MAD = Mean absolute
deviation; MSD = Mean squared deviation Daz‐Narvez V,  San‐Martn‐
Roldn D, Calzadilla‐Nez A, San‐Martn‐Roldn P, Parody‐Muoz A, Rob‐
ledo‐Veloso G.  using the  double  exponential  smoothing  model.
Chile, 2020 LL* ‐ CI UL ‐ CI *LL: Lower limit; CI: Confidence in‐
terval; UL: Upper limit contact with the cases and  monitor  them
so  that  patients  can  quickly access clinical care. If none of
these points The progress of the COVID‐19 pandemic in Chile  fits
are  achieved,  any action or indication will be ineffective well
into a model and we study its predictive capacity.  in containing
the  pandemic.  Chile has disseminated By analyzing the epidemio‐
logical characteristics and neither the notified contact  indica‐
tors nor the indicator of test results delivered within 24 hours.
Contacts are disease, the key to successful outbreak  control  is
being  notified,  but without any specification of the time.  ob‐
tained through mitigation strategies(6).  There are no statistics
either  with  regard  to compliance The World Health Organization
(WHO) has indicated that easing restrictions  does  not  end  the
epidemic  in any with quarantines or supervised discharge of con‐
firmed country. Ending the epidemic will require a sustained  WHO
has  provided  support for epidemiological effort by individuals,
communities and governments studies of seroprevalence, which sug‐
gest that the percentage of the population infected with antibod‐
ies surveillance is recommended to detect cases early and may  be
relatively small (2‐3%), without knowing how isolate them, quick‐
ly locate those who have been in long  this  immunity  lasts(20).
Rev. Latino‐Am. Enfermagem 2020;28:e3346.  The mathematical model
of any process tries to 19th). It should be mentioned that active
cases in Chile describe its basic components and tries to predict
some represent 47.04% (SD=1.96) of confirmed  cases,  as  general
trends, but it will never be able to provide an of May 5th, 2020.
The propensity of this percentage exact description  and  predic‐
tion  should  tend to decrease gradually and slowly according im‐
pede this in an epidemiological context: (a) no model to interna‐
tional experience, but it has stagnated for can include all vari‐
ables that influence a process; (b) 13 days between 45‐50%.  This
stagnation is probably there are unknown variables that cannot be
incorporated due to the fact that the  public  health  strategies
and  the in the prediction; (c) these variables depend on popula‐
tions behavior are not equivalent to that of the  conditions  and
the   specific  nature  of  the  virus,  on  the  countries  men‐
tioned(26‐38).  social conditions people live in, and on the  im‐
munity  Chile needs to remain vigilant and adjust strategies sta‐
tus of a particular patient; (d) the socio‐economic  around  pre‐
vention  and  control  measures,  which means infrastructure of a
country; (e) the capacities of the to improve health actions  and
to  strengthen  surveillance  health system at a given time, f) a
smart health policy systems and public health  infrastructure  to
provide  the that a country could implement to prevent the spread
early detection and rapid response. We hope, for the and take the
most appropriate measures to mitigate the sake of Chilean health,
that the support of infrastructure impact of the process  associ‐
ated to these infections to and health assets achieve the results
in terms of the maximum; and (g) on the intelligence and level of
effectiveness  and  do not pose a problem of needs and resources.
At the same time, emergency preparations  are  necessary  in  re‐
sponse  to  a  more serious outbreak in other parts of the world.
The knowledge of these that may occur(1,6).   variables  and  the
consequent  intentional  modification of The monitoring of simple
but at the same time all or some of these variables  will  modify
the  contagion  critical parameters of patient behavior at an in‐
tensive rate in a positive or negative way. Therefore, this  rate
care  unit  (ICU)  grants us critical information to know and the
specific derivations of the nature of all of these these  parame‐
ters  and their evolution in terms of severity, variables make it
impossible to create an exact forecast providing information  for
the  sake of control, intervention of the future. Thus, the model
presented here can only and mitigation  strategy  proposals.  The
current use of the provide a basis for a comprehension mechanism,
under intensive care capacity for  COVID‐19  patients  represents
the  type  of  circumstances,  constraints and current on average
17.10% (SD=1.35) of the total  available  ICU  population  condi‐
tions.  All of these aspects limit the beds in Chile. Whether the
country reaches 20,111 active predictive capacity  and  attention
needs  to  be paid to cases (42,751 confirmed cases, according to
the active changes in the determining factors that may constitute
case/confirmed  case  ratio),  the  number of intensive the cause
compelling to change the model to explain care beds will  not  be
sufficient  for  COVID‐19  patients the behavior of the pandemic.
One of the transcendental and this health support would collapse.
This  would aspects in epidemiology is to try to predict the evo‐
lution happen on May 22nd, 2020. This  calculation  considers  of
infectious  diseases.  This  attempt  is usually done the current
number of intensive care beds available in  through  models  that
consider  the progress of cases over Chile: 3,264 and the average
percentage of intensive time in a certain place,  transmissibili‐
ty, among other care capacity use for COVID‐19 patients in Chile,
which causes. Nevertheless, these do not include the specific  is
8.28%  (SD=1.06), and intensive care capacity use characteristics
of the affected  population(23‐25).   in  non‐COVID‐19  patients,
which  is  48.96%  (SD=1.74) The experience of European countries
that have indicated specific population intervention measures has
the  incidence  does not decelerate (as it falls within the shown
that the deceleration of the incidence is achieved  error  margin
of  the prediction), but the ratio of active when a percentage or
critical mass of confirmed cases cases/confirmed cases decreases,
then  the scenario of is reached, compared to the general popula‐
tion. That ICU collapse is likely.   is  the  case  for:  Austria
(0.12%),  Norway  (0.12%), Ventilation support is the cornerstone
of the  management  of  subjects  with  respiratory  failure  due
(0.15%),  Denmark  (0.15%), Switzerland (0.17%), to COVID‐19. The
current use of invasive mechanical United Kingdom (0.18%), Portu‐
gal (0.18%), Iceland ventilation (IMV) for COVID‐19 patients rep‐
resents on (0.18%), Sweden (0.20%), Spain (0.21%) and Italy aver‐
age 18.48% (SD=1.22) of the total mechanical (0.21%). It is esti‐
mated that the slowdown in  the  ventilators  (MV)  available  in
Chile.  If  the  country  reaches  incidence  in  Chile  would be
achieved when the average 28,423 active cases  (60,418  confirmed
cases,   according  of  31.527  (SD=12.160)  confirmed  cases  is
reached.  to the active case/confirmed case ratio), MV  will  not
be  That  happens on May 13th, 2020 (May 10th and July sufficient
for the ventilatory needs of COVID‐19 patients Daz‐Narvez V, San‐
Martn‐Roldn  D,  Calzadilla‐Nez A, San‐Martn‐Roldn P, Parody‐Muoz
A, Robledo‐Veloso G.  and this  health  support  would  collapse.
This  would curve. From this model, it follows that the number of
happen on June 4 , 2020. This calculation considers the  infected
cases  will continue to increase. The number of current number of
MV available in Chile: 1,825 and the confirmed  cases  will  grow
stronger  and within a short time average percentages in Chile of
IMV use in COVID‐19 if the population behavior and public  health
measures  patients,  which is 5.01% (SD=0.67), and of IMV use are
not in line with the size of this international  public  in  non‐
COVID‐19 patients, which is 21.91% (SD=1.17) health emergency. We
hope that the results will enable the medical staff  and  leaders
to  make  decisions. In no incidence rate (as it falls within the
error margin of the case should restrictions be relaxed and  epi‐
demiological prediction) and the active case/confirmed case ratio
surveillance needs improvements, as this is not the  end  do  not
decrease,  the scenario of health failure due to of the pandemic.
the lack of MV is plausible, although less likely than  the  col‐
lapse  of  the  intensive  care system.  This predictive model is
provisional and depends on the constant use of all the  variables
maintained.   Any  change  will undoubtedly modify the prediction
and, therefore, daily variations should  be  monitored,  although
the  predictive model does not present considerable and important
faults in the current reality. The predictions of this model have
been  good and have a safety coefficient that allows us to calcu‐
late with some slack the public health needs  the  care  for  the
current  cases  might require.  This information is relevant when
deciding on measures to contain an epidemic. The appropriate  fit
and  good  predictive capacity of this model makes it possible to
propose it as an epidemiological method for monitoring  and  pre‐
dicting the progression of infectious diseases in the local situ‐
ation, e.g. regions, provinces and  communes(43).   Our  approach
has  limitations.  This  study was based on the cases reported by
MINSAL and contains the biases of case confirmation and  informa‐
tion, which may be delayed with respect to the occurrence of cas‐
es, the delay in the appearance of symptoms due to the incubation
period and the high proportion of unreported cases as a result of
limited detection and testing capacity.  Moreover,  data  sources
may be biased, incomplete or only capture certain aspects, versus
others that may be equally relevant, such as chronic pathologies,
risk  factors,  nutritional  status, among others.  This analysis
does not necessarily represent the actual situation of the cases,
as  it excludes confirmed cases in laboratories not considered by
surveillance systems and sub‐clinical cases. This model does  not
consider  variations due to seasonal changes, social aggregation,
etc. either.  In addition, it is dependent on the addition of new
MV  to the health network. This analysis of epidemiological char‐
acteristics provides important information  on  the  behavior  of
COVID‐19 to propose effective control strategies at all levels of
health care(7).  The type of curve that best explains the  behav‐
ior of COVID‐19 in Chile is a doubly smoothed exponential 1. Epi‐
demiology Working Group for NCIP Epidemic Response, Chinese  Cen‐
ter  for  Disease  Control  and (COVID‐19) in China. Zhonghua Liu
Xing Bing Xue Za 2. Guo YR, Cao QD, Hong ZS, Tan YY, Chen SD, Jin
HJ,  et  al.  The  origin, transmission and clinical therapies on
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‐19) outbreak ‐ an update  on  the
status.  Mil  Med Res. 2020 Mar;7(1):11.  3. Adhikari SP, Meng S,
Wu YJ, Mao YP, Ye RX, Wang QZ, et al. Epidemiology, causes, clin‐
ical manifestation and diagnosis, prevention and control of coro‐
navirus disease (COVID‐19) during the early  outbreak  period:  a
scoping  4.  World  Health  Organization. Novel Coronavirus‐Japan
(ex‐China). [Internet] Geneva: WWHO; 2020 [cited Feb 1, 5. Rothan
HA,  Byrareddy  SN.  The epidemiology and 6. Park M, Cook AR, Lim
JT, Sun Y, Dickens BL. A  Current  Evidence.  J  Clin  Med.  2020
Mar;9(4). pii: E967.  7. Departamento de Epidemiologa. Ministerio
de Salud (Chile). Situacin  Epidemiolgica  COVID‐19.  [Internet].
8.  World  Health  Organization. COVID‐19 Dashboard.  [Internet].
2020 [cited Apr 22, 2020]. Available from: Taherpour N, Rahimi S,
Izadi  N,  et  al.  Epidemiological  Rev.  Latino‐Am.  Enfermagem
2020;28:e3346.  Arch Acad Emerg Med. [Internet]. 2020 Apr  [cited
Apr  recommendations  for  international  traffic  in relation to
COVID‐19 outbreak. [Internet]. Geneva: WHO; 2020 10. World Health
Organization.  Coronavirus  disease  (COVID‐19) Pandemic. [Inter‐
net]. Geneva: WHO; 2020 22. Daz V, Calzadilla A,  Lpez  H.  2005.
Una  aproximacin  11. Kucharski AJ, Russell TW, Diamond C, Liu Y,
Edmunds al concepto de Hecho Cientfico Cinta Moebio.  [Internet].
J, Funk S, et al.  2005 [Acceso 1 feb 2020];22:100‐11, Disponible
en: Early dynamics of transmission and 12. McCullough PA, Eidt J,
Rangaswami  J,  Lerma  E, Tumlin J, Wheelan K, et al. Urgent need
for individual mobile phone and  institutional  reporting  of  at
home,  13.  Canavos GC. Probabilidad y Estadstica. Aplicaciones y
Mtodos. Madrid: McGraw‐Hill; 1988. Captulo 14,  14.  Piskunov  N.
Clculo  Diferencial e Integral. 2.ed.  15. Mauricio JA. Introduc‐
cin al Anlisis de Series Madrid; 2007 [Acceso 22 abr  2020].  pp.
125‐137.  16. Taylor JK, Cihon C. Statistical Techniques for Data
Analysis. 2.ed. Miami: Chapman & Hall/CRC; 2004.   17.  Holt  CC.
Forecasting Seasonals and Trends by Exponentially Weighted Moving
Averages. Pittsburgh, pronsticos. [Internet] Bahia  Blanca:  Uni‐
versidad  23.  Moarefian  M,  Pascal JA, Fundamental mathematical
model shows that applied electrical field enhances 24.  Salim  F,
Ioannidis M, Grecki T. Experimentally validated mathematical mod‐
el of analyte uptake by permeation passive samplers. Environ  Sci
Process  25. Canals L Mauricio, Canals C Andrea. Percolacin de la
epidemia de influenza AH1N1 en el mundo: [Internet]. 2020  [cited
Apr 22, 2020]. Available from: CoV‐2), COVID‐19, France et Monde.
[Internet]. 2020 28. Department of Health  and  Social  Care  and
Public Health (England) Number of coronavirus (COVID‐19) 19. Jim‐
nez JF, Gzquez JC, Snchez R. la capacidad cases and risk  in  the
UK.  [Internet].  2020  [cited May 5, predictiva en los mtodos de
Box‐Jenkins y Holt‐ Winters: una aplicacin  al  sector  turstica.
Rev.  Eur.  Dir. Econ. Empres. [Internet]. 2006 [Acceso 1 feb 29.
Federal Office of Public Health (Switzerland).  New  coronavirus.
[Internet]. 2020 [cited May 5, 2020].  opening remarks at the me‐
dia briefing on COVID‐19 ‐ 20  April  2020.  [Internet].  Geneva:
WHO; 2020 [cited COVID‐19 en Espaa. [Internet]. 2020 [Acceso mayo
Daz‐Narvez V, San‐Martn‐Roldn  D,  Calzadilla‐Nez  A,  San‐Martn‐
Roldn  P, Parody‐Muoz A, Robledo‐Veloso G.  31. Ministrio da Sade
(Portugal).  Direo‐Geral  da  and  demand.  Health  Policy.  2005
Mar;71(3):289‐301.   Sade.  Disponibilizao  de Dados. [Internet].
2020 41. Sociedad Chilena de Medicina Intensiva. Encuesta  diaria
realidad  nacional  intensivo 05 de Mayo. [Internet].  32. Minis‐
tero della Salute (Italia). Covid‐19, i  casi  in  Italia  il  28
aprile  ore  18. [Internet]. 2020 [cited May 5, 42. Ministerio de
Ciencia,  Tecnologa,  Conocimiento  e  Innovacin  (Chile).  Datos
COVID‐19.  [Internet].  2020 33. Directorate of Health (Iceland).
COVID‐19 in Iceland Statistics. [Internet]. 2020  [cited  May  5,
2020].  Available  43. Canals L Mauricio. Predictibilidad a corto
plazo del nmero de casos de la influenza pandmica AH1N1  Affairs,
Health, Care and Consumer Protection. Official COVID‐19 Dashboard
Explanatory Notes [Internet].  Current information about COVID‐19
(novel  coronavirus) [Internet]. 2020 [cited May 5, 2020]. Avail‐
able from: 37.  Folkhlsomyndigheten.  Bekrftade  fall  i  Sverige
daglig  uppdatering.  [Internet].  2020 [cited May 5, 2020].  38.
Sundhedsstyrelsen. COVID‐19 update: statistics and  charts.  [In‐
ternet].  2020  [cited  May 5, 2020].  39. Haniffa R, Isaam I, De
Silva AP, Dondorp AM, De Keizer NF. Performance of critical  care
prognostic  scoring  systems  in low and middle‐income countries:
40. Wild C, Narath M. Evaluating and planning ICUs:  methods  and
approaches  to differentiate between need Ricardo Alexandre Arcn‐
cio David San Martin‐Roldn Copyright  2020 Revista  Latino‐Ameri‐
cana de Enfermagem offered. Recommended for maximum dissemination
and use of











