Rev. Latino-Am. Enfermagem
Effect of income on the cumulative incidence of COVID-19:
an ecological study*
Ricardo de Mattos Russo Rafael1,2
Mercedes Neto1
Davi Gomes Depret1
Adriana Costa Gil1,3
income and the cumulative incidence of COVID-19 in the
neighborhoods of the city of Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil. Method:
Mary Hellem Silva Fonseca1,3
Reinaldo Souza-Santos
Objective: to analyze the relationship between per capita
an ecological study using neighborhoods as units of analysis.
The cumulative incidence rate per 100,000 inhabitants and
the median of potential confounding variables (sex, race,
and age) were calculated. Multiple analysis included quantile
regression, estimating the regression coefficients of the
variable income for every five percentiles from the 10th to
90th percentiles to verify the relationship between income
and incidence. Results: the city’s rate was 36.58 new cases
per 100,000 inhabitants. In general, the highest rates were
observed in the wealthiest regions. Multiple analysis was
consistent with this observation since the per capita income
Health Context”.
Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Faculdade de
an increase of R$ 0.02 in the neighborhood’s per capita income
Scholarship holder at the Universidade do Estado do Rio
for every unit of incidence. Conclusion: cumulative incident
Coletiva (CEPESC), Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
Scholarship holder at the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento
de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES), Brazil.
coefficient of 0.02 (p-value <0.001; R2 32.93). That is, there is
Enfermagem, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
de Janeiro, Centro de Estudos e Pesquisas em Saúde
affected all percentiles analyzed, with a median regression
rates of COVID-19 are influenced by one’s neighborhood of
residency, suggesting that access to testing is uneven.
Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Escola Nacional de Saúde
Pública Sergio Arouca, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
Descriptors: Coronavirus; Pandemics; Uses of Epidemiology;
Income; Socioeconomic Factors; Incidence
Rafael RMR, Neto M, Depret DG, Gil AC, Fonseca MHS, Souza-Santos R. Effect of income on the cumulative
incidence of COVID-19: an ecological study. Rev. Latino-Am. Enfermagem. 2020;28:e3344. [Access ___ __ ____];
month day
Rev. Latino-Am. Enfermagem 2020;28:e3344.
newspaper presents a report on the possibility of
With the declaration of the new Coronavirus
more significant contagion and lethality among Afro-
disease (COVID-19) pandemic by the World Health
descendent individuals(13). If we consider that the
Organization on March 11 , 2020, the escalation of
relationship of income distribution in Brazil is affected
studies addressing potential strategies to cope with
by race, investigations are needed to address these
the disease has reached a new level(1-2). A COVID-19
variables in explanatory models.
vaccine, which is the primary means to decrease the
Finally, similar to other respiratory infections,
population’s susceptibility, and consequently the best
advanced age (the elderly) has been appointed as the
way to flatten epidemic curves, is inexistent up to
variable leading to the most severe manifestations of
now. Thus, only measures to intervene in the social
the disease in most papers investigating the COVID-19
structure as a way to reduce the speed at which
pandemic(14-15). In this sense, it seems essential to
COVID-19 spreads remain .
control models intended to investigate the relationship
The need to identify the more vulnerable groups
between income and COVID-19 for sex, race, and age,
and the disease’s behavior has gained space in the
to perform a more complex explanatory analysis, an
aspect that is lacking in the knowledge acquired so far.
treatment, and containment mechanisms have guided
though regarding the disease’s social dynamics in
developing countries and more impoverished regions.
The reason is that accumulated theoretical knowledge
regarding infectious diseases indicates that there is a
potential relationship between per capita income and
the incidence of the disease; its spread dynamics are
different in European and North American regions,
where a significant portion of studies addressing
Therefore, this study presents an alternative
are directly linked to the per capita income of
neighborhoods, regardless of the remaining predictors
Therefore, this study’s objective is: to analyze the
relationship between per capita income and cumulative
incidence of the COVID-19 in the neighborhoods in the
city of Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
tuberculosis, and leprosy have already reported this
This is an ecological study, the units of analysis
relationship so that it remains to be known how
of which were 159 neighborhoods in the city of Rio de
this variable behaves in the case of the COVID-19
Janeiro, located in the metropolitan region of Rio de
pandemic, a critical gap so far(7-9).
Janeiro. The option to investigate at a neighborhood
Based on the international debate on the topic,
level, especially in the city of Rio de Janeiro, is because
this study postulates three other factors related
of the possibility to understand social nuances and
to income, mainly due to their possible role as
inequalities, which may ultimately behave similarly to
confounding variables in analytical models. The first
other Brazilian regions.
postulate found in the Brazilian literature is that
The databases made available by the Pereira
per capita income is related to race. Economic and
social inequalities produce harmful effects on illness
of Rio de Janeiro were used. The variables concerning
and access to health services(10). To some extent,
the population structure were collected through the
this relationship can be reproduced in the COVID-19
Data Rio application of the IPP, using data from the
context, so that these effects need to be investigated
2010 Census provided by the Instituto Brasileiro
in analytical models. There is abundant literature
reporting that women more frequently access health
Geography and Statistics)(16). They are: population,
services, either because of the way they conceive the
distribution of the population according to sex, age
health-disease construct and understand their self-
distribution, self-reported race, and per capita income.
assessment of health, or because of the – already
The neighborhood was the unit of initial observation.
agreed upon - harmful effects of the traditional view of
gender on the male population(11-12). In this sense, the
Administrative Regions.
distribution of sex in the composition of the population
may somehow affect the epidemic’s behavior.
The databases of the government of the state of Rio
de Janeiro that were available to the public were used
Bringing up this debate in which race and
in data collection, specifically through the Coronavírus
socioeconomic class are intimately involved in the
COVID-19(17) application. The variables collected in
Rafael RMR, Neto M, Depret DG, Gil AC, Fonseca MHS, Souza-Santos R.
this application were: sex, age, date of report, city of
and Per capita Income presented a Z statistic of 8.63
residence, neighborhood, and test result. Two aspects
and 828, respectively. In both cases, the p-value was
need to be clarified: 1) the unit of observation used
by the state government system is the individual; 2)
performed visual tests of distribution, confirming that
the report of the number of cases, which is updated
the distribution of data was not normal. Therefore,
daily, is only available after laboratory confirmation
of positive testing – information regarding suspected
considered the characteristics of this distribution.
cases discarded upon laboratory exam is not disclosed.
Data were collected from April 7th to 13th 2020.
the univariate analyses consisted of calculating the
Considering the speed at which data are produced
median values of the percentages of women, of those
due to the progression phase of the COVID-19
60 years or older, and afro-descendent individuals,
epidemic in Brazil, it is important to note that data
and per capita income in Reais (R$) aggregated
concerning the disease occurred on April 13th, totaling
2,323 observations. Of these, 11 were excluded:
established by the city of Rio de Janeiro
nine because they referred to another city, and two
A bivariate analysis was performed to measure
were imported cases (allochthonous). This database
the association between the exposure variable of
contains community transmissions from April 5th
interest and outcome, using Spearman’s correlation
to 13 , 2020. After data collection, variables were
because the distribution was not normal. This test
considered the null hypothesis that two variables are
region, to facilitate the presentation of results.
independent, considered to be statistically significant
at 5% (type 1 error).
Cumulative Incidence Rate, is obtained by dividing
The effect of the exposure variable on the
the cumulative number of confirmed cases since
outcome was estimated using a multiple quantile
the population in the neighborhood started being
regression analysis, using the neighborhood as the
observed, using 100,000 as the basis of the indicator.
unit of analysis(19). This regression model was chosen
Thus, the results of this variable were expressed in
because the distribution was not normal; the outcome
new cases per 100,000 inhabitants. The exposure
variable was skewed to the left; and there was high
variable of interest, per capita income, was collected
heteroscedasticity in the relationship between the
and used in the analysis in its original format.
outcome and exposure of interest variables, observed
Independent control variables were considered
by the Breusch-Pagan & Cook-Weisberg test (X2
according to the theoretical model presented in
857.89; p-valor: <0.001). This effect makes certain
the introduction: the percentage of women in the
percentiles be influenced by the model predictors,
population, the proportion of elderly individuals above
while linear regression models based on the least
the age of 60, and the percentage of afro-descendent
squares method are not appropriate. In this sense,
and mixed-race individuals. These variables were
although not very widespread in the health field,
constructed by dividing the numerator, where the
interest information was placed (e.g., the number
already traditional method in econometric models, is a
of women in the population) by the neighborhood’s
methodological option.
population. The results were multiplied by 100.
The regression coefficients were estimated in this
The building, cleansing, and statistical processing
multiple analysis for every five percentiles from the 10th
of the databases were performed using Stata SE 15
to 90th percentiles, using the per capita income variable
(StataCorp LP, College Station, United States). First,
as the exposure of interest and forcing the entry of
univariate analysis was performed to apply descriptive
the remaining independent variables, always from the
analyses, and then bivariate analysis and multiple
same regression model and according to this study’s
quantile regression were performed to identify the
theoretical model. The standard error was calculated
dependence and effect of the per capita income and
using the bootstrap replication technique with 20
COVID-19 incidence rate.
repetitions. Standard error was calculated using the
Because the outcome and exposure variables are
bootstrap technique with 20 repetitions. Taking as
two continuous numerical variables, the Shapiro-Wilk
reference the null hypothesis that the effect of the
test was used to test whether the distribution was
exposure variable is equal in all the percentiles, the
normal. The test considered the null hypothesis that
Wald test was calculated using a reference error of 5%.
the distribution is normal and close to a Gaussian curve.
Finally, considering this study presents secondary
The Shapiro-Wilk test for the variables Incidence Rate
data analysis and uses databases widely accessible
Rev. Latino-Am. Enfermagem 2020;28:e3344.
in public sites, ethical recommendations for studies
old or older, of Afro-descendent individuals, and per
addressing human subjects do not apply, and this study
capita income (R$). Attention is drawn to the fact that
is exempted from the opinion of a Research Ethics
Copacabana, Tijuca, and Botafogo rank first in terms
of median percentages of women and individuals aged
60 years old or older, and rank last in terms of the
median percentage of Afro-descendent individuals. At
the opposite end is Complexo do Alemão, presenting
neighborhoods in the city of Rio de Janeiro, aggregated
the lowest per capita income in the city and the lowest
by administrative regions, according to the variables:
percentage of women and elderly individuals. The
number of neighborhoods in the region and the median
region also presents one of the largest Afro-descendent
percentage of women, of individuals aged 60 years
populations in the city, second only to Cidade de Deus.
according to the variables: number of neighborhoods in the region and the median percentages of women, of individuals
60 years old or older, of Afro-descendent individuals, and per capita income (R$). Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil, 2020
Number of
≥ 60 year- old
Per capita
Barra da Tijuca
Campo Grande
Cidade de Deus
Comp. do Alemão
Ilha do Governador
Rio Comprido
Santa Cruz
Santa Teresa
São Cristóvão
Vigário Geral
Vila Isabel
Administrative region
*Minimum wage R$ 510.00, Brazil, 2010
Rafael RMR, Neto M, Depret DG, Gil AC, Fonseca MHS, Souza-Santos R.
The COVID-19 Cumulative Incidence Rate in the
Rejecting the null hypothesis that the two variables
city was 36.58 new cases per 100,000 inhabitants,
are independent, Spearman’s test resulted in Rho 0.524;
totaling 2,312 new cases confirmed in the period. Of
these, 599 cases did not provide information regarding
regression results. Note that per capita income presented
the neighborhood of residence (34.74%) while 146
an effect in all the strata analyzes. The β coefficient of
(11.83%) did not provide information on age, and
the per capita income variable also increases according
to the percentile, indicating this variable presents
by administrative region in the general population,
higher explanatory power in the model. Note that the
according to women, men, individuals aged 60 years
adjusted R2 increases as a function of the Incidence
old or older, and the non-elderly population (<60 years
Rate percentile, while the number of predictors with a
old). Note that the Lagoa region leads with the highest
statistically significant effect, decreases.
incidence in all the variables analyzed, followed by Tijuca
and Copacabana. Ilha de Paquetá and Jacarezinho,
per capita income variable, according to the percentile
on the other hand, did not present cases so far. Maré
analyzed. Note the accentuated effect of the variable in
and Complexo do Alemão present 1.08 and 1.45 new
the last percentile. Rejecting the null hypothesis that the
cases per 100,000 inhabitants, respectively. Specifically,
adjusted per capita income variable is the same in all the
concerning the incidence rate among 60-year-old or
percentiles tested, the F statistic was equal to 4.18, with
older individuals, Rocinha presents the highest result.
a p-value equal to 0.003.
Janeiro. RJ. Brazil. 2020
Barra da Tijuca
Campo Grande
Cidade de Deus
Administrative Region
Complexo do Alemão
Ilha de Paquetá
Ilha do Governador
Rio Comprido
Santa Cruz
Santa Teresa
São Cristóvão
Vigário Geral
Vila Isabel
Rev. Latino-Am. Enfermagem 2020;28:e3344.
percentages of individuals aged 60 years old or older, Afro-descendent individuals, and women in the neighborhoods
in the city of Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil, 2020
Adjusted R2
% Afro-descendent individuals
Per capita income¶
% 60-year-old or older individuals
Per capita income¶
% Afro-descendent individuals
% Afro-descendent individuals
% Afro-descendent individuals
% 60-year-old or older individuals
Per capita income¶
% 60-year-old or older individuals
Per capita income¶
% 60-year-old or older individuals
Per capita income¶
% 60-year-old or older individuals
% Afro-descendent individuals
Per capita income
*Regression coefficient; †Confidence Interval 95%; ‡Lower limit; §Upper limit; ||T statistics; ¶Minimum wage R$ 510.00, Brazil, 2010
incidence rate adjusted for the percentages of individuals aged 60 years old or older, Afro-descendent and women in
the neighborhoods of the city of Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil, 2020
Rafael RMR, Neto M, Depret DG, Gil AC, Fonseca MHS, Souza-Santos R.
explanations: 1) that the social isolation adopted in
the wealthiest neighborhoods may positively affect the
Relating income with the incidence of infectious
spread chain in the more impoverished neighborhoods;
diseases is not new, as this relationship has been
and 2) that underreporting rates are higher in poorer
diseases(7-9,20). Since the beginning of the pandemic,
In addition to these explanations, it is important
to note that the media widely reported that the first
the behavior of the epidemic in the world’s most
cases imported into the city were among residents
impoverished regions(6,21-22). Considering knowledge of
from the South of the city and Barra da Tijuca, who
the epidemiological chain of other infectious diseases,
had recently returned from Europe. Hence, the virus
many situations may determine a different behavior
started spreading mainly in these areas, which does
of COVID-19 in these places. These situations include
not exclude the remaining hypotheses under analysis.
greater spread due to the high population and
The Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, monitoring the
household density, interaction with other chronic and
COVID-19 and using Big Data from Instituto de
infectious diseases coupled with the health systems’
Comunicação e Informação Científica e Tecnológica
diminished capacity to provide treatment, and greater
lethality due to the decreased capacity of intensive
Communication and Information in Health], launched
care units(23).
the MonitoraCovid-19. The system monitors variables
This study’s main finding indicates that per capita
concerning the movement of people, using it as a proxy
income has a significant effect on the cumulative
in the assessment of social isolation. The system’s
incidence rate of COVID-19, progressively increasing
results show decreased use of public transportation in
the city compared to the period before the pandemic,
percentiles. Note that, in the groups with the lowest
especially when the first legal measures were adopted
incidence, each incidence unit is related to an increase
to prevent the spread of the disease(25). On the other
of R$ 0.01 in income, while this increase is of R$0.03
hand, the results also show certain instability in
in the 75
percentiles. In this sense, more
the flow of people over the days, especially on the
affluent neighborhoods tend to present higher rates,
weekends. It is not, however, possible to state that
regardless of the percentage of elderly individuals,
groups do not intercommunicate, especially between
Afro-descendants, and women.
neighborhoods in a time when people are experiencing
From what is known about the social structures
in the city of Rio de Janeiro, considering a higher
Considering that the largest populations with the
worst access to services are concentrated in the most
impoverished neighborhoods, the natural hypothesis is
impoverished regions, we conclude that the disease is
that these regions would experience a greater spread
spreading more rapidly in the regions with the lowest
of the disease, as it occurs in the epidemiological chain
per capita income, even though it was initiated in
of other respiratory diseases
. Nonetheless, the
the areas with the highest per capita income(27). For
practical effect of these findings gains strength in the
these reasons, it seems unlikely that the relationship
observation that the wealthiest regions such as Lagoa,
between income and incidence is a reflex of the social
Tijuca and Copacabana, present high cumulative
isolation adopted in the city’s wealthiest regions. On
incidence rates, occupying the first of the five ranks
the contrary, the explanation likely lies in the second
of per capita income. On the other hand, Maré and
hypothesis raised in the UFRRJ report, that is, high
Complexo do Alemão, which rank last in terms of
underreporting rates in the poorest regions are the
income, also present the lowest incidence rates of the
origin of this phenomenon.
the increasing precariousness of the workforce(26).
This paradox was recently raised in a technical
The key to solving this theoretical imbroglio may
be linked to three interrelated aspects: classification,
of Rio de Janeiro (UFRRJ) regarding the COVID-19
sociospatial dynamics in the program areas of Rio
de Janeiro and Baixada Fluminense(24). The results
suspected and probable cases in the calculation of
reported by this document indicate a higher number
databases, recommending social isolation without
of cases in regions with the highest economic power,
contradicting the distribution typically observed in
recommended in various official documents that mild
Brazilian states. The document presents two potential
and asymptomatic cases remain at home in isolation,
Rev. Latino-Am. Enfermagem 2020;28:e3344.
without, however, requiring screening testing. The
of drug-resistant tuberculosis. The worst results of
important selection bias expressed in the option of
this form of the disease were associated with a more
presenting indicators based only on confirmed cases
abundant supply of culture tests and better economic
indicates a considerable and fallacious decrease in the
indicators, among which income(7). Spatial analysis
incidence of the disease, preventing the planning of
of the relationship between HIV infection and social
more effective public policies .
determinants presented results that are consistent
with this study’s findings, where the highest infection
underreporting of the disease. A mathematical model
rates are present in places with improved living
produced by the Imperial College London indicates
conditions, reinforcing the idea that unequal access to
a mean detection rate well below the actual context
screening tests of infectious diseases directly affects
of the pandemic(28). The number of cases in Brazil
the report of diseases(8).
is estimated to be 12 to 15 times greater than that
reported by the Ministry of Health(29-30).
Therefore, it is expected that approximately
5% of the infected people will need intensive care,
One study based on the Chinese experience in
2.3% will require mechanical ventilation, while Brazil
Wuhan estimates that 86% of the infectious cases
presents problems in the number and distribution
were not documented before the country’s health
of intensive care beds. Thus, it is urgent to expand
infectious cases were the source of contamination
regional inequalities in Brazilian cities
of approximately 80% of new cases(31). Even though
mentioning that even in China, where the health
there is no consensus regarding this matter, a
system was minimally organized to receive COVID-19
patients, the influence of disparities in the access to
continue to spread 8 days after the symptoms cease,
health services was observed(35). After all, capital-
highlighting the need to record suspected and probable
based necropolitics seem to be disseminated to the
point of reaching poverty and the lives of poor people
. Ultimately, it means that a lack of proper
documentation of cases directly affects the adoption
of preventive measures and other sanitary barriers
. It is worth
to contain the epidemic, which directly contributes to
important to interpret these results considering its
worsening the epidemic.
limitations. The low quality of data, verified by the
A lack of public information regarding the number
significant percentage of cases without identifying the
of COVID-19 tests and how they are distributed among
individuals’ housing neighborhood, and the partiality
states and in the interior of each city is also another
of the cases tested, can produce uncertainty in the
problem to be faced in the context of the pandemic in
calculation of incidences. The format used by the
Brazil. It is known that Brazil is among the countries
Brazilian Ministry of Health and the government
that least perform screening testing, which decreases
of Rio de Janeiro to disclose data is another aspect
its ability to map cases based on suspected, probable,
that hinders more in-depth analyses. Although within
and contact cases
. Brazil performs 296 tests per 1
a unit of analysis, such as a neighborhood, may
million inhabitants while the United States, Spain, and
coexist distinct and unequal social conditions, this
Italy test 10,266, 19,896, and 19,490, respectively.
is the smallest unit of analysis possible to achieve
Additionally, it is important to note that, due to a
with the format used by the Brazilian government.
lack of rapid tests in most health care units, COVID-19
As previously mentioned, to decrease the influence of
testing has taken place in specialized laboratories,
heterogeneity of data, this study considered multiple
clinics, and hospitals. Specifically in Rio de Janeiro,
analysis techniques that addressed such disparities,
social inequality and poor access to health services
as is the case of quantile regression.
are probably contributing to the higher cumulative
The option to use the 2010 Census as the
incidence in the wealthiest regions, especially in
population base can also produce a discreet increase
downtown and the south, with the highest per capita
in the incident rates, considering that the denominator
income and the largest number of public and private
is undersized. However, even if losing its validity, this
facilities. That is, the explanatory hypothesis is that the
choice was made to facilitate comparison of results. At
incident rate is not truly low in the more impoverished
the limit, the interpretation of incidence rates could be
regions, but that there is rather a lower capacity to
even lower, which would constitute more considerable
detect the diseases in these locations.
underreporting of COVID-19 cases. Therefore, this
study represents an advancement in the analysis of
addressing Brazilian cities’ profile and the presence
this phenomenon, mainly because it considers that
Rafael RMR, Neto M, Depret DG, Gil AC, Fonseca MHS, Souza-Santos R.
current investigations have contemplated states and
cities, without investigating differences existing within
these places.
7. Jacobs MG, Pinto-Junior VL. Brazilian cities profile,
the occurence of tuberculosis and its drug-resistant
form. Cienc Saude Coletiva. [Internet]. 2019 [cited
This study’s results indicate the hypothesis that
the disease’s incidence rates in the city of Rio de
Janeiro are related to per capita income, regardless of
other predictors. Considering the low testing in Brazil,
and consequent underreporting, already reported by
other studies, these results indicate that COVID-19
testing is more widely disseminated in the wealthiest
regions of the city. Potentially unequal access among
suspected cases and the functionalist role of capitalbased necropolitics should be considered in future
9. Pescarini JM, Strina A, Nery JS, Skalinski LM, Andrade
KVF. Penna MLF, et al. Socioeconomic risk markers of
analyses addressing this matter, primarily because
and meta-analysis. PLOS Neglect Trop D. [Internet].
of the need to better document cases of the disease,
decreasing potential inequalities in the access to
health services and designing better public policies to
10. Goes EF, Menezes GMS, Almeida MCC, Araújo TVB,
deal with the pandemic.
Alves SV, Alves MTSSB, et al. Racial vulnerability and
individual barriers for Brazilian women seeking first
care following abortion. Cad Saude Publica. [Internet].
2020 [cited Apr 17, 2020];36(Suppl 1):e00189618.
11. Novak JR, Peak T, Gast J, Arnell M. Associations
Men. Am J Men’s Health. [Internet]. 2019 [cited
2. World Health Organization. Naming the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) and the virus that causes it.
[Internet]. 2020 [cited Apr 13, 2020]. Available
12. Jian-Min J, Peng B, We H, Fei W, Xiao-Fang L,
De-Min H, et al. Gender differences in patients with
COVID-19: focus on severity and mortality. MedRxiv
3. Rafael RMR, Neto M, Carvalho MMB, David HMSL,
13. Thebault R, Ba Tran A, Williams V. The coronavirus
Acioli S, Faria MGA. Epidemiology, public policies and
Covid-19 pandemics in Brazil: what can we expect?
alarmingly high rate. Washington Post. April 7, 2020
4. Science in the time of COVID-19. Nat Struct Mol Biol.
14. Kai L, Ying C, Ruzheng L, Kunyuan H. Clinical
feature of COVID-19 in elderly patients: A comparison
what comes next? Science. [Internet]. 2020 [cited
15. Guan W, Liang W, Zhao Y, Liang H, Chen Z,
6. Ayebare RR, Flick R, Okware S, Bodo B, Lamorde M.
Li Y, et al. Comorbidity and its impact on 1590
Adoption of COVID-19 triage strategies for low-income
settings. Lancet Resp Med. [Internet] 2020 [cited
Rev. Latino-Am. Enfermagem 2020;28:e3344.
26. Pereira SOG, Cabral JPC. Informalidade e crise
Rio de Janeiro: IPP; 2020 [Acesso 13 abr 2020].
17. Governo do Estado do Rio de Janeiro. Painel
27. Liu Y, Gayle AA, Wilder-Smith A, Rocklöv J. The
reproductive number of COVID-19 is higher compared
to SARS coronavirus. J Travel Med. [Internet]. 2020
18. Prefeitura da Cidade do Rio de Janeiro. Regiões
28. Walker PGT, Whittaker C, Watson O, Baguelin
M, Ainslie KEC, Bhatia S, et al. The Global Impact
J Econ Perspect. [Internet]. 2001 [cited Apr 14,
20. World Health Organization. Global Tuberculosis
Report. [Internet] Geneva: WHO; 2019 [cited Apr
21. Lloyd-Sherlock P, Ebrahim S, Geffen L, McKee M.
Bearing the brunt of covid-19: older people in low
and middle income countries. BMJ. [Internet] 2020
Disease Vulnerability. Rand Health Q. [Internet] 2017
23. Dahab M, Zandvoort KV, Flasche S, Warsame A,
Spiegel PB, Waldman RJ, et al. COVID-10 control in
low-income settings and displaced populations: what
can realistically be done? [Internet] 2020 [cited Apr
29. Universidade de São Paulo. Faculdade de Medicina
de Ribeirão Preto. COVID-19 BRASIL. Monitoramento
e análises da situação do Coronavírus no Brasil.
[Internet]. 2020 [Acesso 17 abr 2020]. Disponível
30. Prado M, Bastos L, Batista A, Antunes B, Baião F,
Maçaira P, et al. Nota Técnica 4 – 21/03/2020 - Análise
de subnotificação do número de casos confirmados da
COVID-19 no Brasil. [Internet]. Rio de Janeiro: Núcleo
de Operações e Inteligência em Saúde, PUCRio;
31. Li R, Pei S, Chen B, Song Y, Zhang T, Yang W,
et al. Substantial undocumented infection facilitates
(SARS-CoV2). Science. [Internet]. 2020 [cited Mar
32. Chang D, Mo G, Yuan X, Tao X, Peng X, Wang F,
et al. Time Kinetics of Viral Clearance and Resolution
of Symptoms in Novel Coronavirus Infection. AJRCCM.
24. Universidade Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro.
Dinâmica socioespacial da COVID-19 na cidade do
Rio de Janeiro e na Baixada Fluminense. [Internet].
Rio de Janeiro: UFRRJ; 2020 [Acesso 16 abr 2020].
34. Rache B, Rocha R, Nunes L, Spinola P, Malik
AM, Massuda A. Nota técnica n. 3 - Necessidades
de Infraestrutura do SUS em Preparo ao COVID19:
Leitos de UTI, Respiradores e Ocupação Hospitalar.
25. Fundação Oswaldo Cruz. Instituto de Comunicação
[Internet]. Rio de Janeiro: Instituto de Estudos para
Científica e Tecnológica em Saúde. MonitoraCovid-19.
Políticas de Saúde; 2020 [Acesso 23 mar 2020].
Rafael RMR, Neto M, Depret DG, Gil AC, Fonseca MHS, Souza-Santos R.
35. Ji Y, Ma Z, Peppelenbosch MP, Pan Q. Potential
healthcare resource availability. Lancet Glob Health.
Ricardo Alexandre Arcêncio
Ricardo de Mattos Russo Rafael
Copyright © 2020 Revista Latino-Americana de Enfermagem
offered. Recommended for maximum dissemination and use of
