Rev.  Latino‐Am. Enfermagem Estimation and prediction of COVID‐19
cases in Brazilian metropolises* George J Bezerra Sousa1,2 Thiago
Santos  Garces1,3  epidemiological peak, and the number of deaths
by the new Virna Ribeiro Feitosa Cestari1,3 coronavirus.  Method:
a  mathematical  and  epidemiological Thereza Maria Magalhes Mor‐
eira1,4 model of susceptible, infected, and recovered  cases  was
applied  to  the  nine Brazilian capitals with the highest number
Raquel Sampaio Florncio1,3 of cases of the infection. The  number
of  cases for the 80 Maria Lcia Duarte Pereira days following the
first case was estimated by solving the  differential  equations.
The  results were logarithmized and compared with the actual val‐
ues to observe the model fit. In all scenarios, it was considered
that no preventive measures had been taken. Results: the nine me‐
tropolises studied showed an upward curve of confirmed  cases  of
COVID‐19.  The prediction data point to the peak of the infection
between late April and early May. Fortaleza and  Manaus  had  the
highest  transmission  rates  (20  and  18, respectively). Rio de
Janeiro may have the largest number of infected people  (692,957)
and  Health Context.  Florianpolis the smallest (24,750). Conclu‐
sion: the estimates Universidade Estadual do Cear, Fortaleza, CE,
Brazil.   Scholarship  holder  at the Fundao Cearense de Apoio of
the transmission rate, epidemiological peak, and number of ao De‐
senvolvimento Cientfico e Tecnolgico (FUNCAP), Scholarship holder
at the Coordenao de Aperfeioamento de Pessoal  de  Nvel  Superior
(CAPES),  Brazil.  Desenvolvimento Cientfico e Tecnolgico (CNPq),
Brazil.  deaths from coronavirus in Brazilian  metropolises  pre‐
sented expressive and important numbers the Brazilian Ministry of
Health needs to consider. The results confirm the rapid spread of
the  virus  and  its high mortality in the country.  Forecasting;
Epidemiology; Epidemiologic Models; Nursing.  Sousa  GJB,  Garces
TS,  Cestari VRF, Moreira TMM, Florencio RS, Pereira MLD. Estima‐
tion and prediction of COVID‐19 cases in Brazilian  metropolises.
Rev.  Latino‐Am. Enfermagem. 2020;28:e3345. [Access ___ __ ____];
month day Rev. Latino‐Am. Enfermagem  2020;28:e3345.   and  their
social  acceptance. Given the above, this research aimed to esti‐
mate the transmission rate, The new coronavirus (SARS‐CoV‐2)  be‐
longs  to a epidemiological peak, and the number of deaths family
of viruses that cause diseases in the human by  COVID‐19  in  the
nine  Brazilian  capitals  with  the respiratory system. Previous
outbreaks of coronavirus highest number of cases.  (CoVs) include
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS)‐CoV and Middle East res‐
piratory  syndrome  (MERS)‐CoV  as  major   threats   to   public
health(1).  December 2019 in Wuhan, Hubei province, Peoples prov‐
inces(2). Due to its high spread rate, China declared COVID‐19  a
second‐class  infectious  disease, with management measures for a
first‐class infectious disease (the most  dangerous  category  of
infection)(3).   The  spread  of  COVID‐19  was rapid and global.
Thailand, on January 13th, 2020. Next, cases of the disease  were
confirmed  in  Japan  (January 16th); South Korea (January 20th);
Taiwan and the United States (January 21st); Hong Kong and  Macau
from France, Nepal, and Vietnam (January 24th); Malaysia and Aus‐
tralia (January 25th); Canada (January 26th);  Cambodia  (January
27th);  Germany (January 28th); Finland, United Arab Emirates and
Sri Lanka (January 29th); Italy, India and the Philippines (Janu‐
ary 30th); United Kingdom (January 31st)(4), and the geographical
expansion of this pandemic continues.  In this scenario,  it  re‐
mains  to be established that the ongoing pandemic of COVID‐19 is
devastating, measures. On January 30th, 2020,  the  World  Health
Organization (WHO) characterized the disease as a pandemic, being
declared a Public Health Emergency of  International  Importance.
As  of April 1st, 2020, 823,626 cases of Covid‐19 were confirmed,
with 40,598 deaths worldwide(5).  In an analysis of the  COVID‐19
case  panel in Brazil until April 1st, 6,836 cases were confirmed
by the countrys Ministry of Health, in addition to 241 deaths and
a fatality rate of 3.5%. The cases are distributed throughout the
national territory, with a greater concentration in the Southeast
(4,223 cases; 62%), followed by the Northeast (1,007 cases; 15%),
South (765 cases; 11%), Midwest (504 cases; 7%)  and  North  (337
cases;  5%)(6).   research is urgent to estimate the risk of this
pandemic exposed urban centers that  face  the  heaviest  disease
burden, it is imperative to closely monitor changes in epidemiol‐
ogy, the effect of public health strategies, The  first  case  of
COVID‐19  was  diagnosed  on  February 27th, 2020 in So Paulo. On
February 3rd, a public health emergency was decreed in the  coun‐
try,  and on March 20th, 2020, community transmission of the dis‐
ease was announced in the country(7).  Thus, to  understand  this
diseases  dynamics in the population, the SIR epidemiologic model
proposed by Kermack and  McKendric(8)  was  applied.  This  model
rests  on  the  idea  that there are three groups of individuals:
susceptible (S), infected (I), and recovered (R). The  mathemati‐
cal  expression  of  the model uses three differential equations,
where  is the parameter that controls the  transition  between  S
and  I,  and  is the parameter of the transition between I and R.
cities with the highest number of cases until  March  27th,  2020
was  investigated,  which corresponds to nine capital cities (out
of twenty‐seven). According (IBGE), the estimated Brazilian popu‐
lation amounts to 208,494,900 inhabitants living in 5,571 cities,
distributed in five great regions. The selected capitals were Be‐
lo  Horizonte,  So  Paulo and Rio de Janeiro in the Southeast re‐
gion; Curitiba, Florianpolis and Porto Alegre in the South;  Man‐
aus  in  the  North;  Salvador  and  Fortaleza  in the Northeast.
Brasilia, in the Midwest, would be added, but  was  removed  from
the pool of investigated cities due to difficulties to find offi‐
cial data.  Data were extracted from  the  daily  epidemiological
reports  since the first day of confirmed cases until March 30th,
2020 and the capitals population was according  to  the  IBGE(9).
Initially,  graphs  were  created  with the actual number of con‐
firmed cases in each city until the end date, followed  by  their
logarithmic  transformation  to  show  growth patterns. Then, the
differential equations were solved for each of the nine scenarios
and  the  number of cases was predicted until the 80th day of in‐
fection since day one. To test the models fit, the natural  loga‐
rithm  of  the  observed  and predicted number of cases was used.
They were graphically presented for the sake of  a  better  More‐
over,  the diseases basic reproduction rate (R0) could be identi‐
fied, which shows how many Sousa GJB,  Garces  TS,  Cestari  VRF,
Moreira  TMM,  Florencio  RS, Pereira MLD.  healthy people an ill
person can infect. The predicted Southeast, So Paulo (SP), Rio de
Janeiro  (RJ), and number of cases, the day of peak, and the pos‐
sible Belo Horizonte (BH) notified the first  cases  on  February
number  of deaths were also investigated, considering 22nd, March
6th, and March 16th, respectively. Until the the  maximum  number
of  people who can be sick end of data collection, there were no‐
tified 1,233 cases and 1% lethality. These values were considered
as  if  in SP, 553 in RJ, and 163 in BH.  Regarding the number of
predicted cases, the no prevention measure had been  taken.  Data
were  observed  cases  were superior to the modeled number.  ana‐
lyzed in R software, using the package deSolve.   This  work  did
not  require Ethics Committee approval In BH, some degree of sta‐
bility was observed since because  the  state  health  department
freely distributed day 14, with the number of cases remaining in‐
ferior to Brazilian resolution 466/2012 on ethics  for  research.
and Porto Alegre notified the first cases as from March 5th (Por‐
to Alegre) and March  12th  (Curitiba  and  Florianpolis).  Until
March  30th,  the  number  of confirmed In total, 2,829 confirmed
cases of COVID‐19 were analyzed in nine Brazilian capital cities.
In the cases increased to 77 in Curitiba, 50 in Florianpolis, and
143 in Porto Alegre.  Rio de Janeiro Rio de Janeiro So  Paulo  So
Paulo  Belo Horizonte Belo Horizonte Nl = Natural logarithm Fort‐
aleza, CE, 2020 Rev. Latino‐Am.  Enfermagem  2020;28:e3345.   The
cases  estimated  with the help of the SIR model In the Northeast
Region, Salvador and Fortaleza  in  Curitiba,  Florianpolis,  and
Porto  Alegre  showed that notified the first cases on March 13th
and 16th, the observed and predicted case  numbers  were  similar
respectively.  The number of confirmed cases until March than the
model until the twentieth day of infection. From that point,  the
number of observed cases remained relatively constant and inferi‐
or to the model.  In the North Region, Manaus was the  only  city
30th  was 117 in Salvador and 382 in Fortaleza. In the predictive
model, Salvador and Fortaleza presented a outcomes predicted  for
COVID‐19  in  the capital cities under study. The prediction data
appoint the occurrence investigated. The first case  of  COVID‐19
in  the  city  of the infection peak between the end of April and
the was registered on March 13th and, on the last day  of  begin‐
ning of May. Fortaleza and Manaus have the highest the investiga‐
tion, 140 cases had been registered. The transmission  rates  (20
and  18,  respectively).  Rio  de sharp increase in the number of
cases was similar to the Janeiro may have the largest  number  of
infected people (692,957) and Florianpolis the smallest (24,750).
Porto Alegre Porto Alegre Nl = Natural logarithm  Fortaleza,  CE,
Brazil, 2020 Sousa GJB, Garces TS, Cestari VRF, Moreira TMM, Flo‐
rencio RS, Pereira MLD.  Nl = Natural  logarithm  Fortaleza,  CE,
Brazil,  2020  Nl = Natural logarithm Fortaleza, CE, Brazil, 2020
Number of days from the first case to the peak Peak date  Maximum
number  of  infected people number of deaths Belo Horizonte Porto
Alegre  Rio  de  Janeiro  So  Paulo  Rev.  Latino‐Am.  Enfermagem
2020;28:e3345.  city, with 2.1 million inhabitants and one of the
largest tourist destinations in Brazil. The growth  of  cases  in
the  city  is  expressive and linked to a social scene where geo‐
graphical differences, whether in the levels of health  relations
between the cities prevail, in addition to an risks or the access
to the resources available in  the  insufficient  health  service
network  with  difficulties  to  countrys  health system(10). En‐
demics, epidemics, and maintain human  resources(14).   pandemics
have  historical and social roots, and their In the Northeast re‐
gion, the cases of COVID‐19 main determinants are the poor living
conditions of the were analyzed in Salvador and Fortaleza, cities
with population, the different forms  of  spatial  occupation,  a
great  international  travel  flow.  Salvador is the most and the
lack of access to services.  populous city in the  Northeast  and
the  third  in the Unlike other infectious diseases, COVID‐19 af‐
fects country. Fortaleza, the state capital of Cear, has the  de‐
veloped  and  developing countries, making no social distinction.
The results of this investigation showed the capitals.  In  these
cities,  an exponential growth pattern highest number of cases of
COVID‐19 in the Southeast of cases was observed and Fortaleza al‐
so presented region, distributed in the cities of SP and RJ, con‐
sidered the highest transmission rate. Currently,  Fortaleza  the
largest and most developed national metropolises concentrates 91%
of COVID‐19 cases in the state of and, to a lesser extent, in BH.
So  Paulo is the main Cear, concentrated in neighborhoods of dif‐
ferent social financial,  corporate,  and  mercantile  center  in
South  and  economic levels.  America, being the most influential
Brazilian city at In this context, the number of national and the
global  level.  RJ  is the largest international tourist interna‐
tional tourists who seek Brazil as a destination has  destination
in Brazil, a characteristic that led to the increased every year.
Capitals such as So Paulo, Rio de appearance of the first case of
the  disease in the country.  Also in the Southeast, BH showed an
upward the most popular destinations for tourists,  whether  pat‐
tern  of the disease curve. In comparison with SP for their natu‐
ral landscapes, culture, or economic and RJ, however, it present‐
ed a lower number of cases, attractions. To accommodate this num‐
ber of tourists, which can be justified by having a smaller popu‐
lation  Brazil  has become one of the emerging countries with the
than the two other cities, and by the more uniform  greatest  po‐
tential  for  the  development of air transport.  distribution of
basic health services and their scope.  This is due to the  coun‐
trys territorial dimension and In BH, human resources, health ac‐
tions, and services high geographical and social mobility of  its
population,  offered by the Unified Health System are distributed
the accelerated displacement  of  economic  frontiers,  to  offer
quality  services,  with greater equity and easy Brazils competi‐
tive insertion in global markets and and timely  access  to  meet
the  needs  of  a  larger portion monetary stability, and the in‐
creased purchasing power of the population for consumers(15). The
establishment  of  hubs  in several , which can contribute to the
early diagnosis and containment of disease cases.  Moving on, the
South  region,  with  the cities of airports has enhanced the en‐
trance of foreigners in different countries of  the  world.   Cu‐
ritiba,  Florianpolis  and Porto Alegre, had a lower The economic
advantages of tourism in Brazil are number of cases. These cities
represent  a  major  tourist,  undeniable, however, the issues of
travel and health economic, and cultural center with European in‐
fluence,  are an existing concern. The profiles of travelers dif‐
fer evidenced in its predominantly elderly population. People  in
terms  of  origin  and  destination, which can directly living in
cities in the South region have greater access influence the  oc‐
currence of epidemics and pandemics, to health services when com‐
pared to other Brazilian often of unexpected magnitude and sever‐
ity(16),  such  as COVID‐19. Also, limited coverage and access to
health It is  worth  noting  that  the  unequal  distribution  of
COVID‐19  cases  among  Brazilian regions is also services in the
country can corroborate the spread of influenced by  underreport‐
ing. The North and Northeast While a small portion of the Brazil‐
ian population has regions are marked by a  worse  assessment  of
the health access to health services, many people face a decrease
status, greater restriction of activities, and lesser use  of  in
the availability of hospital beds(17). This factor, linked health
services, despite the greater coverage  of  public  to  COVID‐19s
pandemic  potential, put the response capacity of epidemiological
surveillance services at the Representing the North region,  Man‐
aus,  the  state center of attention and required preventive mea‐
sures capital of Amazonas, is the main financial,  corporate  and
from  the  Brazilian  government,  such as confinement and social
distancing.  Sousa GJB, Garces TS, Cestari VRF, Moreira TMM, Flo‐
rencio  RS, Pereira MLD.  Extensive measures are needed to reduce
the of Health should take into account. All  metropolises  inter‐
personal  transmission  of COVID‐19 . Some of the showed an expo‐
nential growth in the number of cases.  measures adopted, such as
spraying  disinfectant  and  The  transmission rate was higher in
Fortaleza and in alcohol in the air, on roads, vehicles, and peo‐
ple  have  Manaus,  where many deaths are expected. Thus, the not
been effective though(3). More expanded measures results  confirm
the  rapid  spread of the virus and its high include isolation of
cases, identification and monitoring  mortality  in  Brazil.   of
contacts, environmental disinfection, and use of personal protec‐
tive equipment(4). Regarding the control strategies, social  dis‐
tancing stood out as a strategy that limits human‐to‐human trans‐
mission, as well as reducing secondary infections  between  close
contacts and health events, and reducing or delaying the dissemi‐
nation of the virus.  Moreover, epidemics and pandemics  paralyze
the economic, social, political, and cultural development, inter‐
fering in the demographic trajectory of the locations where  they
spread(18).  The  emergence  of COVID‐19 and its consequences has
left the worldwide population with feelings of  fears,  concerns,
and  anxiety, which can further expand the disease data(19).  The
biological, mental, emotional, social, and economic chaos  caused
by COVID‐19 requires a quick response from the federal government
and open and effective communication  with  state  governors.  In
Brazil, divergences are observed between members of the state and
federal governments as to the best measures to adopt to face this
crisis. This lack of understanding is factual and may result in a
greater number of deaths, as a result of the  characteristics  of
the  virus  and  unequal  access  to the health system and health
technologies in the country.  The  publication  of  the  expected
number  of  cases  new. This evidence allows managers to organize
health services, based on public policies such as the creation of
hospital  beds,  purchasing of medical equipment, and development
of health education actions to assure quarantine or  social  dis‐
tancing.   The  main limitation of this study arises from the use
of a secondary database, as data for some cases were  incomplete.
Furthermore, underreporting and/or insufficient testing might in‐
fluence the predicted peak.  It is also  important  to  highlight
that the results did not consider social distancing measures that
aim to reduce the transmission rate of the virus.  1. Rothan  HA,
Byrareddy  SN.  The  epidemiology and pathogenesis of coronavirus
disease (COVID‐2019) 2. Ji W, Wang W, Zhao X, Zai J, Li X.  Cross
species   transmission   of   the  newly  identified  coronavirus
2019nCoV. J Med Virol. [Internet]. 2020 [cited Apr 20, 2020];  3.
Xiao  Y, Torok ME. Taking the right measures to control COVID‐19.
Lancet Infec Dis. [Internet]. 2020 [cited 4. Adhikari SP, Mend S,
Wu YJ, Mao YP, Ye RX, Wand QZ, et al. Epidemiology, causes, clin‐
ical manifestation and diagnosis, prevention and control of coro‐
navirus  disease  (COVID‐19)  during the early outbreak period: a
scoping 5. Organizao Pan‐Americana da Sade. Organizao Mundial  da
Sade. Folha informativa  COVID‐19 (doena causada pelo novo coron‐
avrus). [Internet].  6. Ministrio da Sade (BR). Painel  de  casos
de  doena  Ministrio  da Sade. [Internet]. 2020 [Acesso 20 abr 7.
Dirio Oficial da Unio (BR). Portaria n 454,  de  20  de  maro  de
2020.  Declara,  em todo o territrio nacional, o estado de trans‐
misso comunitria do coronavrus (covid‐19). Dirio Oficial da Unio.
20  mar  2020 [Acesso surveillance professionals in the Brazilian
states.  epidemiological peak, and number of deaths  by  COVID‐19
in the Brazilian metropolises presented expressive 8. Kermack WO,
McKendrick AG. Contributions to the and important  numbers  which
the  Brazilian  Ministry  mathematical theory of epidemics. P Roy
Soc A‐Math Rev. Latino‐Am. Enfermagem  2020;28:e3345.   18.  Bas‐
sanezi  MSB,  Cunha  MF.  One place, two epidemic moments: yellow
fever (1896‐1897) and influenza 9. Instituto  Brasileiro  de  Ge‐
ografia  (BR).  Cidades IBGE.  Braslia: IBGE; 2020 [Acesso 20 abr
2020].  Disponvel  Est  Pop.  [Internet].  2019  [cited  Apr  20,
2020];36:1‐29.   10.  Barreto  ML.  Health inequalities: a global
perspective.  19. Ahorsu DK, Lin CY, Imani V,  Saffari  M,  Grif‐
fiths  MD,  Cienc  Saude  Colet.  [Internet]. 2017 [cited Apr 20,
Pakpour AH. The fear of COVID‐19 Scale: development  and  initial
validation.  Int J Mental Health Addict.  11. Souza RCF, Oliveira
VB, Pereira DB, Costa HSM, Caiaffa WT. Living near health at Belo
Horizonte.   Cad   Metrop.    [Internet].  2016  [cited  Apr  20,
2020];18(36):325‐44.  12. Stopa SR, Malta DC, Monteiro CN, Szwar‐
cwald CL, Goldbaum M, Cesar CLG. Use of and access to health ser‐
vices in Brazil, 2013 National Health  Survey.   13.  Viacava  F,
Bellido  JG.  Health,  access to services and sources of payment,
according to household regionalization in Amazonas: progress  and
challenges.   Cienc  Saude  Coletiva. [Internet]. 2017 [cited Apr
20, 15. Pereira APC. Who are they? Where do they go? the regional
airline  sector in Brazil. Confins. [Internet]. 2016 16. Teixeira
MG, Costa MNC, Paixo ES, Carmo EH,  Barreto  FR,  Penna  GO.  The
achievements  of  the  SUS in tackling the communicable diseases.
Cienc. Saude 17. Albuquerque MV, Viana ALA, Lima LD, Ferreira MP,
Fusaro  ER, Iozzi FL. Regional health inequalities: Evelin Capel‐
lari Crnio Raquel Sampaio Florncio Copyright  2020 Revista  Lati‐
no‐Americana  de Enfermagem offered. Recommended for maximum dis‐
semination and use of






