Radon  et al. BMC Public Health STUDY PROTOCOL Open Access Proto‐
col of a population‐based prospective COVID‐19 cohort  study  Mu‐
nich,  Germany  Katja  Radon1,2*  ,  Elmar  Saathoff3,4,  Michael
Pritsch3, Jessica Michelle  Guggenbhl  Noller3,  Inge  Kroidl3,4,
Laura Olbrich3, Verena Thiel3, Max Diefenbach3, Friedrich Riess3,
Felix  Forster1,  Fabian  Theis5,6,  Andreas  Wieser3,7,  Michael
Hoelscher2,3,4 and the KoCo19 collaboration group Background: Due
to the SARS‐CoV‐2 pandemic, public health interventions have been
introduced  globally  in order to prevent the spread of the virus
and avoid the overload of health care systems, especially for the
most  severely affected patients. Scientific studies to date have
focused primarily on describing the clinical course of  patients,
identifying  treatment  options  and developing vaccines. In Ger‐
many, as in many other regions, current tests for  SARS‐CoV2  are
not conducted on a representative basis and in a longitudinal de‐
sign. Furthermore, knowledge about the immune status of the popu‐
lation  is  lacking. Nonetheless, these data are needed to under‐
stand the dynamics of the pandemic and hence to appropriately de‐
sign  and  evaluate  interventions. For this purpose, we recently
started a prospective population‐based cohort in Munich, Germany,
with  the  aim to develop a better understanding of the state and
dynamics of the pandemic.  Methods: In 100 out  of  755  randomly
selected  constituencies,  3000  Munich households are identified
via random route and  offered  enrollment  into  the  study.  All
household  members are asked to complete a baseline questionnaire
and subjects 14 years of age are asked to provide a venous  blood
sample  of  3 ml for the determination of SARS‐CoV‐2 IgG/IgA sta‐
tus. The residual plasma and the blood pellet are  preserved  for
later genetic and molecular biological investigations. For twelve
months, each household member is asked to keep a diary  of  daily
symptoms,  whereabouts  and contacts via WebApp. If symptoms sug‐
gestive for COVID‐19  are  reported,  family  members,  including
children  <  14  years,  Munich,  for molecular testing for SARS‐
CoV‐2. In case of severe symptoms, participants  will  be  trans‐
ferred  to  a  Munich hospital. For one year, the study teams re‐
visits the households for blood sampling every six weeks.   Katja
Radon  and  Elmar  Saathoff  contributed  equally  to  this work.
Ziemssenstr. 1, 80336 Munich, Germany which permits use, sharing,
adaptation,  distribution  and reproduction in any medium or for‐
mat, as long as you give licence and your  intended  use  is  not
permitted  by  statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use,
you will need to obtain Radon et al. BMC  Public  Health  Discus‐
sion:  With  the  planned study we will establish a reliable epi‐
demiological tool to improve the understanding of the  spread  of
SARS‐CoV‐2  and  to  better  assess  the  effectiveness of public
health measures as well as  their  socio‐economic  effects.  This
will support policy makers in managing the epidemic based on sci‐
entific evidence.  Keywords: COVID‐19, Pandemics, Coronavirus in‐
fections/epidemiology,  Panel  study, Enzyme‐linked Immunosorbent
assay, Models, economic,  Stress,  psychological,  Socio‐economic
factors,  Spatial  analysis, Geographic information systems Since
the first description of the novel coronavirus disease (COVID‐19)
in  December  2019 in Wuhan, China, the disease has spread world‐
wide and classified as a global emergency by  the  WHO  in  early
2020  [1].  In  Germany, the first confirmed case of COVID‐19 was
registered on January 6th 2020 at the Division of Infectious Dis‐
eases and 3]. The transmission chains were interrupted by contact
tracing and isolation of the affected persons.  However,  due  to
the  return of German tourists from holidays in the high‐risk ar‐
eas of northern Italy, in connection with a carnival  celebration
in  the  district of Heinsberg (60 km west of Cologne), the virus
spread to 13 of 16 federal states within one month [4]. The expo‐
nential  increase  in  newly confirmed cases in Germany reached a
total of 155.193 positively tested cases on April 27th 2020  (187
per  100,  000  inhabitants) [4].  Simulations and experiences of
other countries suggest that healthcare systems would be overbur‐
dened and eventually collapse due to a pronounced increase of pa‐
tients needing intensive care support if  no  interventions  were
implemented  [513].  In  the absence of vaccinations and specific
treatment options, public health interventions were initiated  in
Germany, similarly to numerous other countries comparably affect‐
ed. The measures include isolation of confirmed patients, quaran‐
tine of their contacts, use of personal protective equipment, so‐
cial borders [6, 14].  Prediction  models  and  experiences  from
countries like South Korea suggest that combination of these mea‐
sures could be effective in combatting the  disease  [13,  1518].
However, past evidence from other epidemics was not that convinc‐
ing with respect to controlling virus spread by social distancing
[19].  It  remains unclear how comparable previous viral diseases
outbreaks are to SARS‐CoV‐2 [20]. While potentially saving  lives
and protecting healthcare systems from breakdown, one has to bear
in mind that measures of social distancing can have a devastating
impact  on national and global economies, healthcare systems, in‐
comes of individuals and families (especially those in precarious
employment  conditions),  education  (which  particularly affects
disadvantaged groups) and on health and the psychosocial well‐be‐
ing  of  populations [2022]. Devastating effects seen in high‐in‐
come societies will likely be much worse in low and middle income
countries  [23].   Results  of simulation studies existing so far
differ considerably. This is partly due to the unknown number  of
asymptomatic  or  minimally  symptomatic SARS‐CoV‐2 carriers, and
thus the number of undetected cases [4, 7, 13, 17,  24,  25].  In
addition,  the  number  of  confirmed  cases depends on access to
healthcare, laboratory availability, and on the criteria  applied
to  select  the  individuals who should be tested. Therefore, the
basic and the effective reproduction  number  can  only  be  very
roughly estimated and the hospitalization and mortality rates re‐
main to be confirmed. Community cohorts can help  to  assess  the
overall  spread  of infection in the targeted population and thus
provide more reliable estimates of the basic  and  the  effective
reproduction number. This will help to evaluate the burden on the
healthcare system as well as the effectiveness of  public  health
interventions  [26].   Aim of KoCo19 (prospective Covid‐19 cohort
Munich) With the community‐based  household  study  presented  in
this paper, we aim to study the sero‐prevalence and ‐incidence of
SARS‐CoV‐2 antibodies in a representative household sample of the
Munich population. With this approach we will provide a constant‐
ly updated epidemiological instrument that represents the  number
of  infections that have occurred in the city. The study may also
serve as a pilot for studies in other areas of Germany and  other
countries.   The  following study questions will be addressed: 1)
Baseline visit
 What is the SARS‐CoV‐2 antibody prevalence in the Munich general
population?
 How  many of the initially seropositive individuals in the base‐
line‐study were previously tested by pharyngeal swab and  nucleic
acid  amplification  (PCR)  (positively or negatively) and/or had
symptoms suggestive for COVID‐19 (yes or no)?  Radon et  al.  BMC
Public Health
 What  is  the distribution of symptom severity in each Design of
KoCo19 of the groups described above?
 How high is the risk of infection for other household members if
one  person is infected and can household risk factors be identi‐
fied?
 How high is the risk of infection for other inhabitants  of  the
same apartment building if one person is infected?
 What are the risk factors for SARS‐CoV‐2 The study design of Ko‐
Co19 is a community‐based prospective cohort  study  in  randomly
selected  Munich  households.  All members of the selected house‐
holds who are eligible and agree to participate (see Study  popu‐
lation)  are  invited  to the following parts of the 2) Follow‐up
visits
 Is there a change in antibody  titers  of  those  who  initially
tested  positive,  which is potentially necessary to discriminate
from cross‐reactivity with other corona viruses?   How  does  the
spread of the disease develop and what influence do public health
measures have on the incidence?  What is the impact of individual
behaviour  on the incidence of infection?  Which risk factors are
associated with SARS‐CoV‐2 What is the socio‐economic  impact  of
the pandemic and the measures to combat it, especially on the em‐
ployment situation and psychosocial endpoints?  Setting of KoCo19
Munich,  the  capital of the Free State of Bavaria, is located in
the southeast of Germany. Approximately 1.5 million  people  live
here,  9%  of  these  are 75 years and older [27]. The population
density is 50 inhabitants per ha [27]. There are 70 hospital beds
(including  5  intensive care unit beds) and 13 doctors for every
10,000 inhabitants [27]. After the first 100 cases of  SARS‐CoV‐2
were  reported  in  Munich by March 12th 2020, the Bavarian 2020,
initially until May 11 th 2020. Since the same  date,  all  shops
that  do  not sell the basic needs of the population were closed.
Starting on March 21th 2020, when 1288 infected individuals  were
reported  in  Munich, curfews were implemented [28]. According to
these curfews, people are essentially only allowed to  leave  the
house  to  go  to  work,  to the doctor, to buy food, for outdoor
sport related activities (jogging, walking) or to help others who
are depending on support. A minimum distance of 1.5 m between in‐
dividuals must be maintained.  1. Baseline study  (1st  household
visit):  During the baseline study, personal identifying informa‐
tion is collected and stored in a database  separately  from  the
remaining questionnaire information. A blood sample is taken from
which sero‐prevalences of SARS‐CoV‐2 IgG and IgA  antibodies  are
After  the  household visit, participants are asked to answer an:
2. Daily diary: Using a web‐based app, participants are asked  to
fill  out a daily diary on symptoms suggestive of COVID‐19 infec‐
tion, whereabouts,  and  social  contacts.  Additional  questions
might be included throughout the follow‐up period. If symptoms of
COVID‐19 occur, a pharyngeal swab for PCR testing  of  SARS‐CoV‐2
is  offered  at  our  division.   3.  Follow‐up household visits:
Households are revisited every three to six weeks for a new blood
sample  in order to estimate the sero‐incidence of SARS‐CoV‐2 in‐
fection. This frequency can be adapted to the current necessities
of  estimated  prediction  models.  The  follow‐ups are currently
planned for up to 12 months.  The study  will  be  terminated  if
more  efficient  methods to assess the course of the epidemic are
developed or if this no longer appears  relevant.   KoCo19  study
population  For  KoCo19, a representative sample of Munich house‐
holds (target population) is selected by random walk door‐to‐door
methodology  [29].  For  this purpose, 100 of the 755 Munich con‐
stituencies were randomly selected using R (The  R  project).  In
each  of  these constituencies, the geographic center is selected
as the starting point of the random route using  QGIS.  From  the
address  closest  to  this starting point, 30 households per con‐
stituency will be included in the study according to a fixed  al‐
gorithm.  In  the  case of apartment buildings, one household per
floor is selected to investigate possible transmission within the
building.  All household members 14 years are invited to partici‐
pate in KoCo19 by donating a maximum of 3 ml of blood and  to  be
available  for  further blood tests every Radon et al. BMC Public
Health three to six weeks. Participants are informed about  their
SARS‐CoV‐2  antibody  status. Additionally, all household members
are asked to complete a daily questionnaire  on  their  state  of
health,  whereabouts  and  social contacts using an internet or a
smartphone app (WebApp). Persons who do not have a  mobile  phone
or  cannot  operate an App will be interviewed by phone. At least
one household member needs to agree to donate blood, while  other
members can solely participate in the Inclusion criteria are:
 At  the time of inclusion in the study (1st household visit), at
least one of the household members must be 18 years and competent
to provide written informed consent.
 Sufficient  command  of German to understand the participant in‐
formation materials for the study and  to  answer  the  question‐
naires (Note: Due to the urgency of the study, there is no possi‐
bility to develop respondent information and  multilingual  ques‐
tionnaires  or to recruit multilingual study The households where
residents are not present at the time of the visit of one of  the
study  teams  and  do not call to the provided number in order to
arrange a baseline visit, individuals who do  not  give  informed
consent or do not meet the inclusion criteria will be
 replaced  by  the next house on the route for single/ two‐family
houses
 replaced by the next apartment on the same floor in information.
In  case  of  absence  at  the time of the information visit, the
teams leave information material including a telephone number  in
order  to schedule the baseline visit. In the initial informative
visit, teams are accompanied by a police officer; this is consid‐
ered  helpful to enhance trust in the study in times were report‐
edly fraudsters are taking advantage of the exceptional  Overall,
at least 50 field workers working in 25 teams of two are involved
in the study. Each team is responsible for 150 households in five
constituencies. One field worker is a medical student with prior,
extensive training in infectious disease control, including blood
sampling  and pharyngeal swabs in case participants have symptoms
suggestive for COVID‐19 within 14‐days prior to this  visit.  The
second  field  worker is responsible for the informed consent and
interviews. Teams of field workers are carefully trained in study
procedures,  data  confidentiality,  and infection protection and
undergo a proficiency test before initiating field  work.  During
the  first field visits, they are accompanied by a senior medical
doctor of the Division  of  Infectious  Diseases  and  until  the
physician  approves  correct  handling  of all steps of the field
work. To further ensure the quality of field  work  randomly  se‐
lected households are called and asked about the last study visit
and potential problems. In addition,  teams  will  be  repeatedly
monitored  by  a  senior  medical doctor throughout the study. To
avoid infection risks through public  transport,  all  teams  use
rental  cars  during the field work. This is also helpful for the
teams to be able to carry all the  necessary  material  including
personal protective and hygiene equipment.  the case of apartment
buildings.  Study  instruments:  questionnaires  Non‐response  is
recorded  and  taken into account in the analysis of the response
index. Where feasible,  basic  information  (age,  sex,  type  of
building)  and reason of non‐participation are collected for non‐
responders in order to assess  representativeness  of  the  study
population.  In  addition, participants socioeconomic status, mi‐
grant status, sex, and percentage of households with children and
single  households will be compared to the official statistics of
the selected constituencies  and  of  all  Munich  constituencies
(Statistical  Office  Munich).  Field work In order to pre‐inform
the population about the study and thus, increase  response,  the
study  is  announced  in In addition, field workers visit the se‐
lected households before the start of the baseline study  to  in‐
troduce the study, hand out a short leaflet and also the complete
Wherever possible, questions were taken from preexisting validat‐
ed  questionnaire  instruments  [3033].  As it will be crucial to
minimize attrition over time, we minimized the  number  of  ques‐
tions  without losing important information.  The household ques‐
tionnaire includes questions about the living situation (type  of
housing,  number  of bedrooms, apartment size), number of inhabi‐
tants (including date of birth and sex), highest level of  educa‐
tion,  work  situation, household income, second hand smoke expo‐
sure, work of household members in potentially high risk jobs for
SARS‐CoV‐2  infections,  past  pharyngeal  swab testing for SARS‐
CoV‐2 in household members including test  results.   ‐Individual
baseline  questionnaire  Radon  et al. BMC Public Health At base‐
line, all participating household members are asked about date of
birth,  sex,  level  of  education, employment situation, smoking
history, general health, pregnancy, recent influenza vaccination,
pre‐existing medical conditions, symptoms suggestive for COVID‐19
in the 14 days prior to the study, past PCR testing  of  nasopha‐
ryngeal samples for SARS‐CoV‐2 including test result, use of res‐
piratory masks, and work in a potentially high risk job for SARS‐
CoV‐2  infection.   Assuming  that each person is included in the
study with the same probability, repeated drawing  of  4500  from
1.5 million Munich residents will yield the 95% confidence preva‐
lence of the total of reported and unreported infections  in  the
baseline  survey.  The  prevalence of confirmed cases was 0.3% on
April 9th 2020 [34]. This shows that the sample  size  is  suffi‐
cient  for  an  adequately  precise  estimate of the actual sero‐
prevalence in the baseline survey.  Data management The daily di‐
ary includes items about symptoms suggestive for COVID‐19, social
contacts, whereabouts and use of public transport in the past  24
h. Further questions on e.g., the psychosocial and economic situ‐
ation, such as perceived health status,  behavioral  aspects,  or
employment  and  income will be added over the time of the study,
and collected e.g. once a week.  Laboratory analyses Samples will
be analyzed and stored at the Division of First, blood is sampled
in 2.7 ml EDTA containers and thoroughly mixed. Samples are indi‐
vidually  barcoded and packed to be transported to the laboratory
ion ice.  There, the samples are centrifuged to separate the cell
pellet  from the remaining plasma. Cell pellets are frozen at  80
C for further analysis, while the plasma is used for ELISA analy‐
sis  using  a  semi‐automated robotic system (Euroanalyzer I, Eu‐
roimmune, Lbeck, Germany).  Serology is performed primarily using
the  Anti‐SARSCov‐2‐ELISA  IgG  and  IgA (Euroimmune, Lbeck, Ger‐
many). The ELISA system has a  combined  sensitivity  of  between
66.7% (< 10 days after onset of symptoms) and 100% (> 10 days af‐
ter onset of symptoms) according to the manufacturer. Specificity
is  rated as 98.5%, tested in larger cohorts of blood donors. The
remaining plasma is stored for further analysis  or  confirmatory
testing  e.g.  with virus neutralization as appropriate.  Pharyn‐
geal swabs are taken using eSwab systems. The samples are  stored
at  4 C and immediately transported to the laboratory. There, RNA
extraction is performed.  Extracted RNA is divided to  allow  for
cryo‐conservation  at   80 C as well as for diagnostic RT‐PCR for
SARSCoV‐2. The reserve sample will be  used  for  virus  sequence
analysis  to  perform  cluster and outbreak analysis and to study
within family transmission.   Statistical  analysis  Sample  size
calculation As an initial number of participants, 3000 households
with approx. 1.5 participants each were calculated.  Hospital Mu‐
nich. The pseudonymized databases will be combined using a unique
participant ID. Using the combined raw data, a  scripted  routine
analysis is used to produce a daily update of descriptive and bi‐
variate prevalence and incidence data to generate a  study  dash‐
board  (The R project). Main outcome variables are the prevalence
and incidence of SARS‐CoV‐2  antibodies  as  well  as  SARS‐CoV‐2
symptoms  in  the study population and the dynamics thereof. Main
exposure variables are socio‐economic factors,  social  contacts,
city  district  as  well  as  the  living situation. In addition,
changes in the  non‐pharmaceutical  public  health  interventions
will  be  used as predictor of SARS‐CoV‐2 incidence.  Descriptive
analyses Initial descriptive data analyses will be  weighted  for
cluster sampling and include the following parameters:
 Description  of  basic  data  for  responder  and non‐ responder
households
 Socio‐demographic data and known risk factors for SARS‐CoV‐2 in‐
fection
 Baseline  prevalence of SARS‐CoV‐2 sero‐positivity in the Munich
general population stratified for a) symptomatic and asymptomatic
cases and b) cases previously tested via PCR
 The  temporal course of SARS‐CoV‐2 sero‐positivity in the Munich
general population (point prevalence  and  incidence)  stratified
for symptomatic and asymptomatic subjects, and reported cases
 The daily prevalence and incidence of possible COVID‐19 symptoms
in the study population Bi‐variable and  multi‐variable  analyses
Subsequent  bi‐  and  multivariable analyses, taking cluster sam‐
pling into account, will include the following
 Identification of risk factors for asymptomatic, mildly  sympto‐
matic and severely symptomatic SARS‐CoV‐2 Radon et al. BMC Public
Health population (The R  Project)  Assumed  true  prevalence  of
SARS‐CoV‐2  seropositive  residents  of (1.5 million inhabitants)
95% Confidence Interval of SARS‐CoV‐2  seropositive  participants
in infections (age, sex, socioeconomic status, occupation, social
contacts, district). Prevalence ratios are  calculated  for  this
purpose.
 The  temporal  relationship of public health of SARS‐CoV‐2 symp‐
toms and changes in seroprevalence are analysed,  e.g.  by  using
mixed  effect models with a time varying covariate indicating the
different intervention variables at different time points.
 The effect of discontinuation of public  health  longitudinally,
e.g. by mixed effect models.
 The  interaction  between the epidemic and the sociodemographic,
economic, psychological variables, and the  interventions  imple‐
mented to contain it, will be
 An  algorithm for the most reliable prediction of SARS‐CoV‐2 PCR
positivity will be developed.
 Geo‐spatial modelling of exposures  and  outcome  will  be  per‐
formed.   In  addition,  the data is used to gain knowledge about
spread dynamics and to predict the  further  development  of  the
epidemic  under different scenarios. Models used for this purpose
are developed throughout the course of the  study.   The  ongoing
SARS‐CoV‐19 pandemic has changed daily life globally to an extent
unseen before. Due to the lack of vaccinations and  pharmacologi‐
cal  treatment  options,  it was predicted that not taking public
health action will result in an overload of healthcare systems in
most  countries and a mortality of millions in the global popula‐
tion [25]. The public health interventions that have been recent‐
ly implemented by most countries have a huge impact on the econo‐
my and most likely, also on health and well‐being of  the  global
population.  Therefore, to further understand the dynamics of the
disease, population‐based representative household studies  might
be  helpful  and  needed, in order to reliably estimate the total
number of previously infected individuals (with and without symp‐
toms), who are  hopefully  resistant to infection for an extended
period of time.  The study presented here will  provide  a  first
estimate  of  the  prevalence and incidence of sero‐positivity in
the Munich population. Although not  generalizable  on  a  global
scale,  this  will  give  first  insights about the proportion of
asymptomatic and mildly symptomatic  carriers  of  SARS‐CoV‐2  in
comparison  to  the  number of those tested. It will also help to
identify risk factors for infection, course of disease and effec‐
tiveness and efficiency of the public health measures.  Our study
has limitations. In the last years, willingness to participate in
population‐based studies went down considerably [35, 36]. Low re‐
sponse might affect representativeness of the  study  population,
which in turn might have an effect on the generalizability of the
prevalence of positive antibody results to the Munich source pop‐
ulation.  However,  it is unlikely that participation will depend
on sero‐positivity of antibody results as antibody status is  un‐
known  prior to inclusion in the study. In addition, the research
topic is of uppermost interest for many citizens in  the  current
situation,  therefore response is expected to be higher in KoCo19
than in other studies. During  the  first  recruitment  days,  an
overall  response of close to 50% was reached, this provides evi‐
dence for the aforementioned hypothesis.  Response  will  be  in‐
creased  by  revisiting households which did not open the door at
the first visit. For the associations  under  study,  representa‐
tiveness  is of less concern [37].  However, we might not be able
to reach high response especially in specific groups of the  tar‐
get  population, e.g.  subjects with migration background as they
are generally harder to reach in epidemiological studies [38] and
because  time  constraints  impede the development of study docu‐
ments in other languages than German at  the  initiation  of  the
study.  Likewise, the spread of SARS‐CoV‐2 varies locally and de‐
pends on several factors, such as the time course of  the  infec‐
tion in the respective region, the Radon et al. BMC Public Health
population density and age distribution of  the  population,  the
available capacities and the applied countermeasures.  Therefore,
prevalence and incidence results obtained in this  study  locally
might  not  be  easily  generalizable to other cities, regions or
countries. Losses‐to‐follow up will likely occur especially  when
public  health  interventions are reduced or become less restric‐
tive and the public attention focuses less on the pandemic.  How‐
ever,  as long as these missing data can be assumed to be missing
at random multiple imputation can  account  for  attrition  [39].
With  respect to reporting bias, one may assume that participants
are more likely to over‐report symptoms which will result  in  an
overestimation  of  the  symptom prevalence. In order to minimize
other forms of reporting bias we use as many items from validated
questionnaire  instruments  as  possible.  In addition, all items
were carefully checked by several members of the KoCo‐19 team for
their  face validity. Questionnaires, especially the daily diary,
were kept as short as possible. Therefore, the study might not be
able to answer specific questions in favour of more valid answers
and low attrition rate over time. For such aspects,  case‐control
studies,  potentially  nested in the current study, could be per‐
formed.  For ethical reasons,  participants  will  receive  their
SARSCoV‐2  antibody  status after each blood sampling. This might
influence their subsequent behaviour,  especially  when  antibody
status  is positive.  To minimize social desirability bias, ques‐
tionnaires are web‐based and are completed  by  the  participants
themselves. However, because not all participants might have web‐
access and especially older participants might not have the  nec‐
essary  internet competencies, a telephone interview) is recorded
so that systematic differences in response can be accounted  for.
We  are  not  able  to include children under the age of 14 years
from the beginning mainly due to ethical concerns  regarding  the
venous  blood  sampling  by a medical student. Over the course of
the study development of other test methods might allow  the  in‐
clusion of this important part of the Random route recruitment is
a feasible way of recruitment where population lists do not exist
or  are hard to obtain. It has been applied by the WHO in various
vaccination studies since the 1980s, was modified over  time  and
it  is also used in large scale community surveys such as the Eu‐
ropean Working Condition Survey [29, 40].   The  alternative  ap‐
proach,  sampling  via the Munich population registry, would have
taken more time due to the formal  requirements  and  thus  would
have  slowed  down  the start of the study. As we apply a cluster
sampling approach (100 out of  755  constituencies)  and  include
more  than one person per household and more than one subject per
apartment building, clustering has to be taken  into  account  in
the  statistical analyses. Using constituencies made inclusion of
3000 households and the follow‐up visits within six weeks  feasi‐
ble.  Inclusion  of more than one household member and one house‐
hold per floor will help us to better understand  the  spread  of
SARS‐CoV‐2  within  households  and apartment buildings. In addi‐
tion, inclusion of more than one household per apartment building
takes  into  account  that  larger  number of inhabitants live in
apartment buildings, than in one‐  or  two‐family  houses,  which
would  otherwise have been overrepresented.  The sample size cal‐
culation reported here did not take clustering into account. This
was  due  to  the  fact  that the prevalence of SARS‐CoV‐2 within
clusters (household, apartment building, constituency) is so  far
unknown.  Taking a more conservative approach of considering only
3000 participants (= number of households) instead of  4500  par‐
ticipants,  the 95% Confidence Interval for a given prevalence of
0.5%  (50%)  would  increase  from  0.30.7%  (4951%)  to  0.30.8%
(4852%). Thus, changes are minimal and we therefore conclude that
our prevalence estimates will be precise.   Currently,  there  is
only  a  limited number of reliable serologic tests available. By
using the  to our knowledge  best  currently  available  serology
test  system  with  IVD certification in the study, the number of
valid results will be maximized as compared to other less  mature
testing  systems. Still, with very low sero‐prevalence, the false
positive rates in the population might be in  the  range  of  the
test‐background.  All currently performed studies face this limi‐
tation. However, by repeating visits, the seroconversions will be
confirmed,  thus  offering much better data than mere sero‐preva‐
lence data. In addition, it has not  yet  been  established  that
seropositivity  in  ELISA reliably corresponds to immunity.  Thus
further testing such as virus  neutralization  is  performed  for
questionable cases.  As serology only allows the detection of in‐
fection in retrospect, the pharyngeal swab is essential  to  pick
up  acute  infections.  This  also allows to detect subjects with
symptomatic disease who possibly never develop positive serology;
although it is currently believed that most patients will develop
positive serology within 10 days after  onset  of  symptoms.  Be‐
sides, the swab can be used to extract viral RNA and used for se‐
quencing, offering further information about transmission  dynam‐
ics within households, quarters or even worldwide.  In a pandemic
situation, it would neither be ethical nor feasible to use  medi‐
cal doctors for epidemiological field work as they are needed for
clinical service. Therefore, experienced medical students togeth‐
er with students of other subjects perform the field work of this
study. The medical students involved are not removed  from  other
important  tasks  during  the  pandemic. Ethical Radon et al. BMC
Public Health considerations are also relevant  for  the  use  of
personal  protective equipment in this study. Currently, personal
protective equipment  is  available  at  Munich  hospitals.   Its
availability is being re‐evaluated regularly over the duration of
the field work and the demand for personal  protective  equipment
in  clinical  services will always have KoCo19 is a unique possi‐
bility to obtain more reliable estimates of the spread  of  SARS‐
CoV‐2  in the general population and to better understand the dy‐
namics of COVID‐19. Although a single epidemiologic cohort  study
in  one  city will not be able to answer all questions related to
SARS‐CoV‐2; it will provide an  important  epidemiological  basis
for our understanding of the epidemic, and might serve as a blue‐
print for similar studies.  COVID‐19: Corona  Virus  Disease  19;
EDTA:  Ethylenediaminetetraacetic  Acid; ELISA: Enzyme‐linked Im‐
munoassay; Ig: Immunoglobulin; KoCo19: COVID‐19 Acid; RT‐PCR: Re‐
verse  Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction; SARS‐CoV2: Severe
Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2; WHO:  World  Health  We
thank  the  KoCo19  advisory board Prof. Dr. Stefan Endres, Prof.
Dr.  Matthias Tschp, Prof. Dr. Andreas Zapf,  Prof.  Dr.  Manfred
Wildner, and Stefanie Jacobs. We thank Accenture for the pro‐bono
development of the the German Armed Foces (Bundeswehr) for  their
support.  We are grateful to our students at the KoCo19 coordina‐
tion office: Jan Marius Bruger, Simon Michael Winter Jared Ander‐
son; our teams of field workers: Paula Matcau, Norah Kreider, Em‐
ma Dech, Laura Charlotte  Dech,  Tim‐Oliver  Haselwarter,  Julian
Ullrich,  Isabel  Klugherz,  Kristina  Gillig, Kerstin Puchinger,
Michael Hfinger, Tobias Wrfel, Julius Raschka,  Stefan  Hillmann,
Alexander  Maczka,  Konstantin  Pusl, Isabel Brand, Philine Falk,
Alisa Markgraf, Stefanie Fischer, Clemens Lang,  Magdalena  Lang,
Silvan Lange, Claire‐Sophie Pleimelding, Leonie Pattard, Tim Hof‐
berger, Sonja Magdalena Gauder, Marius Gasser,  Vitus  Maximilian
Grauvogl,  Marco Scholz, Hannah Maria Mller, Jonathan Leon Frese,
Valeria Baldassarre, Charlotte Kiani, Anna  Ngoc‐Nhu  Do,  Sophie
Schultz,  Ekaterina Lapteva, Tim Haselwarter, Maximilian Baumann,
Elias Golschan, Vitus Grauvogel, Vera Britz,  Eva  Thumser,  Paul
Schandelmaier,  Patrick  Wustrow, Lea Zuche, Janna Hoefflin, Jeni
Tang, Julia Wolff, Rebecca Bhnlein, Flora Deak,  Lara  Schneider,
Jakob  Reich,  Leonard  Gilberg, Matthias Hermann, Thomas Zimmer‐
mann, Friedrich Caroli, Niklas Thur, Felix Lindner and our  tele‐
phone  interviewers:  Nicole Schfer, Julia Waibel, Pia Wullinger.
# KoCo19 Collaborators are Division of  Infectious  Diseases  and
Tropical   Medicine:  Abhishek  Bakuli,  Judith  Eckstein,  Gnter
Froeschl, Otto Geisenberger, Christof Geldmacher, Arlett  Heiber,
Larissa   Hoffmann,   Kristina   Huber,   Dafni   Metaxa,  Michel
Pletschette, Camilla Rothe,  Mirjam  Schunk,  Claudia  Wallrauch,
Thorbjrn  Zimmer.  Helmholtz Zentrum Mnchen: Mathematics and Life
Sciences).  Reiner Leidl (also affiliated at:  Munich  Center  of
Health  Sciences,  Ludwig MH is the principal investigator of the
study and obtained the necessary funds. Together with KR and  ES,
MH designed the study and wrote the study protocol. MP, JMGN, IK,
LO, FR and VT conceptualized the field work  and,  together  with
MD, FF and AW, made significant contributions to the study proto‐
col. MD is responsible for the conception of all IT related study
components.  FF  is coordinating the data management and together
with MD significantly contributing to data acquisition.  FT  con‐
ceptualizes  the modelling of the spread and dynamics of the dis‐
ease. AW is responsible for the development  and  design  of  all
laboratory methods of KoCo19. All submitted version of the paper.
They all have agreed to be personally related to the accuracy  or
integrity  of any part of the work, even ones in resolved and the
resolution documented in the literature.  This project is  funded
by  the  Bavarian  State  Ministry  of  Science  and Art, the LMU
Klinikum Mnchen and Helmholtz Zentrum Mnchen. The funding  bodies
do  not  play  a  role in the design of the study and collection,
analysis, Availability of  data  and  materials  Not  applicable.
Ethics  approval  and consent to participate 2020, number 20275).
Written informed consent is sought from all participants. In case
of  minors  between  the ages of 8 and 17 years, participants and
their legal guardian(s) are asked for written  informed  consent.
For  children  below the age of 8 years, written informed consent
is sought from the legal guardian(s). The pseudonymization of the
data  enables  us to provide the participants with individualized
results. Personal identifying information is stored  in  a  pass‐
word‐protected  database containing only contact details, contact
status and contact IDs. The data for each questionnaire  response
and the other samples are stored in a separate password‐protected
database containing only ID numbers. It is therefore not possible
to  draw  any  conclusions about the identity of the participants
and the information they have provided. Compliance with data pro‐
tection  regulations  was approved by the Gerhard Meyer. The data
are stored for as long as they are needed to  achieve  the  study
objectives.  Ten  years  after  the start of the study (and every
three years thereafter), the study team will evaluate whether the
study  objectives  for the project have been achieved and, if so,
will request the deletion of all personal data.  Consent for pub‐
lication  Not  applicable.   Competing  interests Ziemssenstr. 1,
80336 Munich, Germany. 2Center for International Health, Leopold‐
strasse  5,  80802  Munich, Germany. 4German Center for Infection
Research (DZIF), partner site Munich, Munich, Germany. 5Helmholtz
Zentrum  Mnchen,  Ingolstdter Landstrae 1, 85764 Neuherberg, Ger‐
many.  Medicine, LMU of Munich, Munich, Germany.   Radon  et  al.
BMC Public Health 1. Sohrabi C, Alsafi Z, O’Neill N, Khan M, Ker‐
wan A, Al‐Jabir A, et al. World  coronavirus  (COVID‐19).  Int  J
Surg.  2020;76:716.  2. Rothe C, Schunk M, Sothmann P, Bretzel G,
Froeschl G, Wallrauch C, et al.  Transmission of 2019‐nCoV infec‐
tion  from  an  asymptomatic  contact  in  Germany. N Engl J Med.
2020;382(10):9701.  3. Wolfel R, Corman VM, Guggemos W, Seilmaier
M,  Zange  S, Muller MA, et al.  Virological assessment of hospi‐
talized patients with COVID‐2019. Nature.  4. Robert Koch  Insti‐
tut.  COVID‐19:  Fallzahlen  in Deutschland und weltweit.  Coron‐
avirus/Fallzahlen.html. Accessed 8  May  2020.   5.  Enserink  M,
Kupferschmidt  K. With COVID‐19, modeling takes on life and death
importance. Science. 2020;367(6485):14145.  6. Wu  JT,  Leung  K,
Leung  GM.  Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domestic and
international spread of the  2019‐nCoV  outbreak  originating  in
Wuhan,  China:  a modelling study. Lancet. 2020;395(10225):68997.
8. Verity R, Okell LC, Dorigatti I, Winskill P, Whittaker C, Imai
N,  et al. Estimates of the severity of coronavirus disease 2019:
a model‐based analysis. Lancet Infect Dis. 2020.   9.  Ciotti  M,
Angeletti S, Minieri M, Giovannetti M, Benvenuto D, Pascarella S,
et al. COVID‐19 Outbreak:  An  Overview.  Chemotherapy.  2020:19.
10.  Boccia  S,  Ricciardi W, Ioannidis JPA. What other countries
can learn from Italy during the COVID‐19  pandemic.  JAMA  Intern
Med.  2020.  11. Mavragani A. Tracking COVID‐19 in Europe: an In‐
fodemiology study. JMIR Public Health Surveill. 2020.   12.  Liv‐
ingston  E,  Bucher  K.  Coronavirus  disease  2019 (COVID‐19) in
Italy. JAMA.  13. Khafaie MA, Rahim F.  Cross‐country  comparison
of  case  fatality  rates  of  COVID‐19/SARS‐COV‐2.  Osong Public
Health Res Perspect. 2020;11(2):7480.  14. Ferguson NM, Laydon D,
Nedjati‐Gilani G, Imai N, Baguelin M, Bhatia S, et al.  Report 9:
impact  of  non‐pharmaceutical  interventions  (NPIs)  to  reduce
COVID‐19  mortality  and healthcare demand. London: Imperial Col‐
lege; 2020.  15. Korean Society of Infectious D,  Korean  Society
of  Pediatric  Infectious  D, Korean Society of E, Korean Society
for Antimicrobial T, Korean Society for Healthcare‐associated In‐
fection  C, Prevention, et al. Report on the Epidemiological Fea‐
tures of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID‐19) Outbreak dynamics of
coronavirus disease 2019 in Korea: based on mathematical modeling
and simulation study. J Korean Med Sci. 2020;35(13):e143.  17. An
der  Heiden M, Buchholz U. Modellierung von Beispielszenarien der
SARS‐CoV‐2‐Epidemie 2020 in  Deutschland;  2020.   18.  Grill  E,
Rothenbacher  D. Stellungnahme der Deutschen Gesellschaft fr Epi‐
demiologie (DGEpi) zur Verbreitung des neuen  Coronavirus  (SARS‐
CoV2).  Ulm:  Deutsche  Gesellschaft fr Epidemiologie; 2020.  19.
Jefferson T, Del Mar CB,  Dooley  L,  Ferroni  E,  Al‐Ansary  LA,
Bawazeer GA, et al. Physical interventions to interrupt or reduce
the spread of respiratory viruses. Cochrane  Database  Syst  Rev.
2011;7:CD006207.   20.  Ioannidis  JPA. Coronavirus disease 2019:
the harms of exaggerated information and non‐evidence‐based  mea‐
sures.  Eur  J  Clin Invest. 2020: 21. Venkatesh A, Edirappuli S.
Social distancing in covid‐19: what are the mental health  impli‐
cations?  BMJ. 2020;369:m1379.  22. Gupta M, Abdelmaksoud A, Jaf‐
ferany M, Lotti T, Sadoughifar R, Goldust M.  COVID‐19 and Econo‐
my. Dermatol Ther. 2020:e13329..  23. Bong CL, Brasher C, Chikum‐
ba E, McDougall R, Mellin‐Olsen J, Enright A. The  COVID‐19  pan‐
demic:  effects  on  low  and middle‐income countries. Anesth 24.
Chowell G, Mizumoto K. The COVID‐19 pandemic  in  the  USA:  what
might we expect? Lancet. 2020;395(10230):10934.  25. Adam D. Spe‐
cial report: the simulations  driving  the  world’s  response  to
COVID‐19.  Nature. 2020.  26. Lipsitch M, Swerdlow DL, Finelli L.
Defining the epidemiology of Covid‐19 studies needed.  N  Engl  J
Med.  2020;382(13):119496.   27. Landeshauptstadt Mnchen. Statis‐
tisches Amt: Interaktive  Anwendungen  rathaus/Stadtinfos/Statis‐
tik/Indikatoren‐und‐Monatszahlen.html.   Accessed   8  28.  Stadt
Mnchen. Entwicklung der Coronavirus‐Flle in Mnchen Munich, Stadt‐
infos/Coronavirus‐Fallzahlen.html.   Accessed   8May  2020.   29.
Lemeshow S, Robinson D. Surveys to measure programme coverage and
on  immunization. World Health Stat Q. 1985;38(1):6575.  30. Bur‐
ney PG, Luczynska C, Chinn S, Jarvis D.  The  European  Community
respiratory  health  survey.  Eur Respir J. 1994;7(5):95460.  32.
Schupp J. The socioeconomic panel (SOEP).  Bundesgesundheitsblatt
Gesundheitsforschung  Gesundheitsschutz.  2012;55(67):76774.  33.
Meisinger C, Peters A, Linseisen J. From the  MONICA‐project  via
KORA  to  the  NAKO‐study:  practical  utility of epidemiological
studies in Augsburg  region.  Gesundheitswesen.  2016;78(2):8490.
34.  Coronavirus in Mnchen: Die aktuelle Entwicklung Munich, Ger‐
many:    City    of     coronavirus‐muenchen‐infektion‐aktueller‐
stand.html. Accessed 8 May 2020.  35. Schipf S, Schone G, Schmidt
B, Gunther K, Stubs G, Greiser KH, et al. The baseline assessment
of  the German National Cohort (NAKO Gesundheitsstudie): partici‐
pation in the examination modules, quality assurance, and the use
of  secondary  data.  Bundesgesundheitsblatt Gesundheitsforschung
Gesundheitsschutz. 2020;63(3):25466.  36. Weinmann T,  Vetter  C,
Karch S, Nowak D, Radon K. Shift work and cognitive impairment in
later life ‐ results of a cross‐sectional pilot study testing the
feasibility  of  a  large‐scale  epidemiologic investigation. BMC
Public Health.  37. Rothman KJ, Gallacher JE, Hatch EE. Why  rep‐
resentativeness    should    be   avoided.   Int   J   Epidemiol.
2013;42(4):10124.  38. Weinmann T, AlZahmi A, Schneck A,  Mancera
Charry  JF,  Froschl  G, Radon K.  Population‐based assessment of
health, healthcare utilisation, and specific needs of Syrian  mi‐
grants in Germany: what is the best sampling method?  BMC Med Res
Methodol. 2019;19(1):5.  39. Young R, Johnson DR. Handling  miss‐
ing values in longitudinal panel data with multiple imputation. J
Marriage Fam. 2015;77(1):27794.  40. Julia M, Belvis F, Vives  A,
Tarafa  G,  Benach  J.  Informal employees in the European Union:
working conditions, employment precariousness and health. J  Pub‐
lic Health (Oxf). 2019;41(2):e141e51.











































