Mulholland and Sinha BMC Medicine
Open Access
Ethnicity and COVID-19 infection: are the
pieces of the puzzle falling into place?
Rachel H. Mulholland1 and Ian P. Sinha2,3*
Keywords: COVID-19, Ethnic inequalities, UK Biobank, Public health, Epidemiology
The COVID-19 pandemic is exposing problems within
our societies, and as always, vulnerable groups are hit
hardest. One key story around COVID-19, particularly
in the UK and USA, has been inequality in COVID-19
outcomes between people from different ethnic backgrounds. Reports of such differences initially emerged
from certain states in the USA, where rates of hospitalisation and death from COVID-19 were higher in Black
people than would be expected from the ethnic composition of the population [1]. Similar findings are shown in
the UK, where Black and South Asian people have disproportionately high rates in intensive care [2], mortality
amongst healthcare workers [3] and the general population [4], and the development of paediatric inflammatory
multisystem syndrome (a paediatric hyperinflammatory
state related to COVID-19) [5]. The question is, why?
Linking data between UK Biobank and Public
Health England
The linked paper by Niedzwiedz et al. [6] adds muchneeded new information. This study links participants in
the UK Biobank to COVID-19 testing data from Public
Health England (PHE). The study recruited 40–70-yearolds and recorded their baseline characteristics between
2006 and 2010 [7]. Associations between the baseline data,
in particular, self-reported ethnicity and socioeconomic
Alder Hey Children’s Hospital, Liverpool, UK
status (deprivation and highest education), were explored
and compared in COVID-19 testing, testing positive and
testing positive in a hospital setting. Results were adjusted
for potential confounding and mediating factors that
reflected the health and social status of the participants.
Of 392,116 participants in the cohort, 2658 were tested
for COVID-19, of whom 948 tested positive. Compared
to the White British population, positive tests were more
likely in Black (relative risk (RR) 3.35 (95% CI 2.48–
4.53)), South Asian (RR 2.42 (95% CI 1.75–3.36) and
White Irish (RR 1.42 (95% CI 1.00–2.03)) people. When
breaking down into more detailed categories, Black
Caribbean (RR 3.51 (95% CI 2.39–5.15) and Pakistani
(RR 3.24 (95% CI 1.73–6.07)) ethnic groups had respectively the highest risk ratio in the Black and South Asian
ethnic backgrounds. The risk of a positive test was also
linked to socioeconomic status and education, where
those living in the most disadvantaged quartile (RR 2.19
(95% CI 1.80–2.66)) and those with lower levels of education (RR 2.00 (95% CI 1.66–2.42)) having the highest
risk of confirmed COVID-19 infection. Adjusting for potential risk factors, including country of birth, whether
they are a healthcare worker, socioeconomic status and
pre-existing health, did not fully explain these ethnic
differences. Socioeconomic differences, however, appeared to make the most substantial contribution to
these ethnic variations.
Collaborations such as these are needed to address
Biobank UK and PHE) should be commended for enabling and conducting a linked data study of this scale so
quickly. Insights are extremely useful and further evidence of what has been previously seen in ethnic groups
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
Mulholland and Sinha BMC Medicine
and socioeconomic backgrounds in relation to COVID19.
Nonetheless, there are potential limitations to cohort
studies using UK Biobank. Firstly, the cohort consists of
volunteers meaning results may not reflect the whole
UK with complete accuracy. In particular, this study only
uses participants from English assessment centres who
were aged 40–70 years when recruited and therefore
cannot be generalised nationally. Secondly, the baseline
characteristics of participants were recorded over 10
years ago and may have changed since they were enrolled. In addition, the models only adjust for risk factors
and do not explore potential interactions between the
exposures and risk factors. Investigating these may add
extra value to insights to evaluate whether ethnic differences occur differently in the potential confounding factors. Alongside this analysis, further data from people in
hospitals and care homes would help identify where
along the patient pathways the problems lie.
Where next?
In order for population-level interventions and policies
to be impactful, we urgently need to develop a mechanistic understanding of the increased risk to different
communities. A holistic approach should be adopted,
alongside more detailed and up-to-date information
around social issues that differ between ethnic groups,
such as environmental conditions (including overcrowding, intergenerational living, standards of accommodation and exposure to pollution), income, type of
employment and working conditions. Linking data with
health records would enable a more accurate exploration
of the role of relevant comorbidities—not just in terms
of prevalence and disease control but also the quality of
care. Public health messaging to different ethnic groups
requires examination, to ensure it is clear and culturally
appropriate at the local and governmental levels. There
is interest in genetic and biological reasons that explain
these ethnic inequalities, but to date, this is only speculative. Theories around the expression of human
leukocyte antigen haplotypes, angiotensin-converting enzyme receptors and vitamin D levels in dark-skinned
people have not been validated. The role of these factors
in COVID-19 disease is poorly understood, and no
group has yet linked them with ethnicity and COVID-19
outcome in a meaningful way to explain the stark inequalities [8–10].
Research on ethnic inequalities from COVID-19 is still
lacking, and most countries with high levels of infection
have not yet released data around this issue. Further
qualitative and quantitative research, grounded in public
health and social sciences, is urgently needed. Resources
like the UK Biobank will enable both epidemiological
and biological research, and the linked study is an example of how useful studies can be done rapidly. The
ethnic inequalities in COVID-19 are of grave importance. The response needs to be collaborative, meaningful, transparent, sensitive, holistic and swift.
COVID-19: Coronavirus disease 2019; PHE: Public Health England; RR: Relative
Not applicable
No external sources of funding
Availability of data and materials
Not applicable
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable
Consent for publication
Not applicable
Competing interests
1. Garg S, Kim L, Whitaker M, et al. Hospitalization rates and characteristics of
patients hospitalized with laboratory-confirmed coronavirus disease
2019—COVID-NET, 14 States, March 1–30. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep.
2. Intensive Care National Audit and Research Centre (ICNARC). ICNARC report
3. M. Weaver, A. Mohdin, H. Pidd, et al. ‘So much living to do’: stories of UK’s
4. The Office for National Statistics (ONS). Coronavirus (COVID-19) related
deaths by ethnic group, England and Wales: 2 March 2020 to 10 April 2020.
5. Riphagen S, Gomez X, Gonzalez-Martinez C, et al. Hyperinflammatory shock
6. Niedzwiedz CL, O’Donnell CA, Jani BD, et al. Ethnic and socioeconomic
differences in SARS-CoV-2 infection: prospective cohort study using UK
8. Hastie CE, MacKay DF, Ho F, et al. Vitamin D concentrations and COVID-19
Mulholland and Sinha BMC Medicine
Li Q, Cao Z, Rahman P, et al. Genetic variability of human angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 (hACE2) among various ethnic populations. bioRxiv.
10. Nguyen A, David JK, Maden SK, et al. Human leukocyte antigen
