Revista da Sociedade Brasileira de Medicina Tropical
Technical Report
#StayHome: Monitoring and benchmarking social isolation
trends in Caruaru and the Região Metropolitana
do Recife during the COVID-19 pandemic
Patricia Takako Endo[1], Ivanovitch Silva[2], Luciana Lima[2], Leonardo Bezerra[2],
Rafael Gomes[2], Marcel Ribeiro-Dantas[3], Gisliany Alves[2],
Kayo Henrique de Carvalho Monteiro[1], Theo Lynn[4]
and Vanderson de Souza Sampaio[5],[6]
[1]. Universidade de Pernambuco, Recife, PE, Brasil.
[2]. Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte, Natal, RN, Brasil.
[3]. Institut Curie, France.
[5]. Fundação de Medicina Tropical Doutor Heitor Vieira Dourado, Manaus, AM, Brasil.
[6]. Fundação de Vigilância em Saúde do Amazonas, Manaus, AM, Brasil.
This technical report presents information related to the Social Isolation Index (SII) of the city of Caruaru, Pernambuco, Brazil. The data
was provided by In Loco, a technology startup that has collected the movement of around 60 million Brazilians through cell phone location.
Keywords: COVID-19. Social isolation. Public health. Public health policy.
COVID-19 is a pandemic characterized by uncertainty in
transmission, pathogenicity, and strain-specific control options.
Governments have a wide range of non-pharmaceutical public
health intervention strategies to mitigate the transmission and the
associated socio-economic effects of respiratory diseases, including
hand-washing, use of face masks, closure of educational institutions
and non-essential businesses, transport and travel restrictions,
and the focus of this report, i.e., quarantine, self-isolation,
and social distancing1. The success of such strategies depends
communication and enabling measures and both personal and
community voluntary responses and behaviors2. Mathematical
models are widely used for informing government decisions.
However, lessons from previous coronavirus outbreaks, for
example severe acute respiratory syndrome, is that the proportion
of transmission that occurs before the onset of clinical symptoms
or in asymptomatic infection could be as important as the intrinsic
transmissibility for determining the ease of control and effectiveness
of intervention strategies3. Data on the impact of government
interventions are difficult to collect and if collected at all, may not
be available to local decision-makers at the level of granularity to
make timely decisions and interventions during a rapidly evolving
pandemic. Consequently, a simple, rapid, low-cost, time- and
context sensitive indicator of the effectiveness of intervention
strategies, such as social distancing is required. In the absence of
mobility data from official sources, anonymous mobile phone traces
can be used as a proxy of human movement and social interactions4,5.
This technical report uses data from In Loco, a Brazilian
consumer geo-tracking and advertising software vendor, to create
a proxy for effective social distancing rates based on consumers’
spatio-temporal movements, and then uses these measurements to
create a social isolation index (SII)6. Furthermore, the granularity
of data available may allow targeted interventions in smaller,
well-defined communities or streets, i.e., at a hyperlocal level. To
illustrate this, we compared the city of Caruaru in Pernambuco,
Brazil with 15 municipalities in the Região Metropolitana do
Endo PT et al. - Monitoring social isolation trends in Caruaru
Caruaru is the most populous city in the interior of Pernambuco
with 361,118 inhabitants; it is the most important city in the Agreste
Pernambuco7,8. It is an economic center for textiles and handicrafts,
hosting one of the largest handicraft markets in Brazil, the Feira
de Caruaru, with over 28,300 vendors in a space over 40,000 m2
in size9.
In Loco’s software is installed in over 60 million mobile
phones through its integration on approximately 600 partner
applications6. These applications were downloaded voluntarily
by end users under the In Loco or partner terms and conditions,
which allow the collection of spatio-temporal data necessary for
the functioning of the app and In Loco advertising. Anonymous
consumer spatio-temporal data collected by In Loco were used
to construct the SII based on the proportion of mobile phones in
a given geographic area that remained within a radius of 450 m
of their “habitual home” location during a given day. In line with
recommendations from In Loco6, habitual home is defined as the
location with the largest activity at night time, in this case, where
the mobile phone is located overnight. A polygon-based approach
was used to create geographic boundaries for cities, states, and
other geographic objects. Individual-level data were aggregated
for pre-defined geographic areas, where a minimum number of In
Loco users were active. Once aggregated, the data were visualized
score and commuter movement, i.e., a higher SII score implied less
movement from the habitual home and vice-versa. For example, if
the SII score is 30% for a specific geographic area on a given day,
it indicates that 30% of monitored mobile phones remained within
450 meters of their habitual homes on that day. State-level data are
available publicly on In Loco’s website10; more granular data are
only available subject to agreement with In Loco.
Despite the federal government’s reluctance, and in the absence
of readily available alternatives, many states and municipalities are
using In Loco data to inform decision-making, including Alagoas,
Amapá, Amazonas, Ceará, Maranhão, Goiás, Mato Grosso do Sul,
Mato Grosso, Minas Gerais, Pará, Paraíba, Piauí, Santa Catarina,
and Rio Grande do Sul11. In Loco data are also being used in Recife
and Caruaru to monitor social isolation.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
On March 15, 2020, state public health measures to mitigate the
spread of COVID-19 were implemented in Caruaru, including selfisolation, social distancing, quarantine, suspension of education,
and gatherings of over one hundred people12. The market and all
non-essential businesses were closed by March 20, 2020, and mobile
health and hygiene controls were installed on March 22, 202013.
The first official case of COVID-19 in Caruaru was registered on
March 23, 2020, the first case of community contamination on
March 27, 2020, and the first death by COVID-19 on April 10, 2020.
By May 1, 2020, Caruaru had 59 confirmed cases and five deaths
from COVID-19, as well as 131 suggested cases of the disease13.
SII for Caruaru and 15 municipalities in RMR at three points from
March 1, 2020 to April 14, 2020, and ranks each by SII based on the
hypothesis that higher index scores correlate with higher effective
social isolation. T2 corresponds to the day following the order
implementing state measures. As can be seen, the SII increased
dramatically in all municipalities as state public health measures
were implemented, moving from an average SII of 32.4% at T1 to
57.5% at T3; the SII range at T1 was 24%-37.6% and 50.8%-63.6
at T2.
The SII suggests that movement declined by T2 as general
knowledge and media coverage of COVID-19 increased and then
decreased again following the implementation of state measures.
This suggests that both media coverage and state intervention play
important but different roles in supporting social distancing and
isolation measures. However, the data also suggest that community
response to public health media coverage and interventions is not
uniform. Indeed, despite the measures taken locally in Caruaru, even
before the first reported case of COVID-19, their SII remained the
lowest of the 16 municipalities ranked. This suggests that to ensure
effective social distancing and achieve social isolation, ongoing
local public health interventions are required.
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS
Federal, state, and local public health policy makers and
influencers need to measure, monitor, and respond to factors
impacting the social and economic life of urban communities. With
novel epidemics, uncertainty in the transmission, pathogenicity,
and availability and effectiveness of strain-specific control options
complicate both decision-making and the efficacy of intervention.
Community norms and behaviors are not homogenous, neither
are public interventions. Local proactive decision-making and
anticipatory interventions require local intelligence so that
remediation and optimization actions can be taken. This technical
report suggests that spatio-temporal data from existing consumer
software applications, although not designed for public health
purposes, can be useful for monitoring adherence to public health
policies in pandemics. We indicated how such data can be used for
monitoring social isolation.
This is not however a panacea for social isolation monitoring.
The sample used for the SII described in this report is not necessarily
representative of the general population. At-risk cohorts, including
older people and those living in extreme poverty, are less likely
to have a mobile phone or have the In Loco software installed.
Notwithstanding this, SII is a promising, potentially useful,
and necessary indicator for timely and effective social isolation
decision-making. Benchmarking allows government officials to
identify not only trends but also relative performance and learn
from others who would appear to be performing more effectively
before taking further action. Policymakers need to consider whether
providers overrides the right to privacy when in the public interest.
In future work, we will report on the impact of additional public
health interventions and explore the relationship of SII with other
demographic variables, media coverage, and COVID-19 statistics
for each urban community.
1. Hollingsworth TD, Klinkenberg D, Heesterbeek H, Anderson
RM. Mitigation Strategies for Pandemic Influenza A: Balancing
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
AUTHORS’ CONTRIBUTION
PTE: Conception and design of the study, Analysis and
version to be submitted; IS: Conception and design of the study,
Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Final
approval of the version to be submitted; LL: Conception and design
of the study, Analysis and interpretation of data, Final approval of
the version to be submitted; LB: Acquisition of data, Final approval
of the version to be submitted; RG: Acquisition of data, Final
approval of the version to be submitted; MRD: Acquisition of data,
Analysis and interpretation of data, Final approval of the version to
version to be submitted; TL: Analysis and interpretation of data,
VSS: Final approval of the version to be submitted).
2. Anderson RM, Heesterbeek H, Klinkenberg D, Hollingsworth TD. How
will country-based mitigation measures influence the course of the
3. Fraser C, Riley S, Anderson RM, Ferguson NM. Factors that make an
infectious disease outbreak controllable. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
4. Oliver N, Letouzé E, Sterly H, Delataille S, De Nadai M, Lepri B, et
al. Mobile phone data and COVID-19: Missing an opportunity? 2020
5. Tizzoni M, Bajardi P, Decuyper A, Kon Kam King G, Schneider CM,
Blondel V, et al. On the Use of Human Mobility Proxies for Modeling
Epidemics. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014;10(7):e1003716.
6. In Loco. Cientistas de dados na luta contra a COVID-19 [Internet]. 2020
Endo PT et al. - Monitoring social isolation trends in Caruaru
7. Prefeitura Municipal de Caruaru. História | Prefeitura Municipal de
9. IPHAN. Feira de Caruaru - IPHAN: About Caruaru [Internet]. 2006
10. In Loco. Mapa de Isolamento Social | COVID-19 | Coronavírus
no Brasil | Inloco [Internet]. [cited 2020 Jun 5]. Available from:
f p =3977930374&h sCt aTr a ck i ng =68943485 - 8e 65 - 4d6f- 8a c 0 af7c3ce710a2%7C45448575-c1a6-42c8-86d9-c68a42fa3fcc.
11. BBC. Coronavírus: uso de dados de geolocalização contra a pandemia
põe em risco sua privacidade? - BBC News Brasil [Internet]. [cited
12. Assembleia Legislativa de Pernambuco. Alepe Legis - Portal da Legislação
Estadual de Pernambuco [Internet]. [cited 2020 Jun 5]. Available from:
13. Prefeitura Municipal de Caruaru. Boletim Municipal: Informativo
Coronavírus| Prefeitura Municipal de Caruaru [Internet]. [cited 2020
OPEN ACCESS
