COPYRIGHT 2020  BY THE ARCHIVES OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY CURRENT
CONCEPTS REVIEW  Lockdown  of  an  Orthopedic  Department  during
COVID‐19  Epidemics, Our Experience in a General Seyedhadi Kalan‐
tar, MD1; Amirreza Farhoud, MD1;  SM  Javad  Mortazavi,  MD1  The
COVID‐19 disease is rapidly spreading around the world, affecting
many countries and their healthcare systems.  on confronting  ob‐
stacles mentioned above using appropriate hospital protocols dur‐
ing the COVID‐19 crisis.  We investigated and compared the number
of  referred  patients to the emergency room, elective, and emer‐
gent orthopedic operations in our hospital, along with  a  number
of  residents and faculty participants in the morning reports and
virtual classes before and after the outbreak of COVID‐19 in  our
hospital.   The number of referred patients to the emergency room
was significantly reduced; the number  of  orthopedic  operations
was  also  decreased  to almost zero in March 2020. Meanwhile, we
managed to dismiss our residents and reduce the number of in‐hos‐
pital  morning reports and conferences. Instead, we designed vir‐
tual classes, and the  number  of  participants  in  our  virtual
classes grew to almost two‐third of the whole participant. We al‐
so managed to fortify our virtual office  system  to  reduce  the
number  of  in‐hospital  visits.  Since our hospital had become a
leading center for the treatment of COVID‐19  patients,  and  the
number  of  referred trauma patients, elective, and trauma opera‐
tions, along with educational activities, was reduced. There  was
also  a  significant  concern  about  the management of elective,
trauma, and post‐operative patients in this era. Orthopedic  fac‐
ulty members needed to react to the current situation cautiously.
We were able to manage the situation with  consideration  of  our
educational  path,  along with the management of personal protec‐
tive equipment (PPE), and the use of  communication  technologies
and specific protocols to overcome the obstacles mentioned above.
Yet involved our staff and With orthopedic faculties  active  in‐
volvement  at in‐hospital activitie and establishment of hospital
protocols considering technological  facilities  and  WHO  guide‐
lines,  we can improve education, management of PPE, and both or‐
thopedic elective and trauma patients.   Level  of  evidence:  IV
Keywords: Coronavirus, COVID‐19, Education, Orthopedics, Personal
protective equipment, Telemedicine announced that a novel  coron‐
avirus, an uninvited guest who is now known as SARS‐Cov‐2 causing
COVID‐19 disease, has entered the human society and is  spreading
in  an alarming pace; Soon this disease was Science, Tehran, Iran
recognized as a pandemic by WHO (1). The number of  affected  pa‐
tients  grew  shockingly  as the reports showed by 18 March 2020,
there were 193,475 confirmed cases and 7,864 deaths worldwide. In
less  than  ten days, the total number of confirmed cases grew up
to 552,589 and  Arch  Bone  Jt  Surg.  2020;  8  (Supplement  1):
235‐241.  Doi: 10.22038/abjs.2020.47834.2362 THE ARCHIVES OF BONE
AND JOINT SURGERY. ABJS.MUMS.AC.IR VOLUME 8. SUPPLEMENT 1.  APRIL
2020  25,042  deaths due to COVID‐19 were reported all around the
planet, and the numbers are still growing at a higher pace  every
day  (2).  Rampaging  all around the globe, the disease took many
governments by surprise. Soon, there was a shortage  of  standard
protective  equipment for health care providers and their people.
The fact that the virus can survive several hours  on  a  surface
and  it  can  be transmitted through droplets and knowing that it
can become airborne in certain situations makes it very dangerous
and  raises  many  concerns  in the general population and mostly
among medical staff (3). By the nature of its geographical close‐
ness  to  China  and ongoing trade and transport between Iran and
China, the disease spread in Iran rapidly. On 18 February,  Irans
government  recognized  the  epidemic of COVID‐19, which soon af‐
fected medical practice in the whole country.  What  happened  in
our hospital?  In this critical situation affecting both patients
and medical staff, there were multiple concerns that needed to be
addressed. Our orthopedic department is founded in a general hos‐
pital, Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex (IKHC), the largest  hospi‐
tal  in the country with more than 1200 beds and most specialties
and subspecialties. Our department, as a referral center  in  the
country,  covers  all  subspecialties  in the field of orthopedic
surgery procedures, including arthroplasty, tumor, spine, sports,
shoulder, foot and ankle, and hand surgery. We also have a devot‐
ed trauma section for orthopedic trauma. We perform approximately
up  to  460 orthopedic surgical procedures each month in our par‐
ticular orthopedic room (OR). By the time of official recognition
of the primary cases of COVID‐19 in Qom city (the seventh largest
city in Iran), our hospital became one of the major  centers  for
treating COVID‐19 patients. A separate outdoor respiratory triage
was designed and used in order to protect  non‐COVID‐19  patients
who referred to OBSTACLES FOR AN ORTHOPEDIC DEPARTMENT DURING THE
COVID‐19 the emergency department. A massive number  of  patients
came  to the respiratory triage. So far, 16000 patients have been
visited, and 1600 were admitted to the hospital in a  month.  One
hundred  patients  were  admitted  to  the ICU; half of them were
eventually intubated. Our orthopedic department  leadership  team
was  well  aware  of the vast amount of workload on the hospital.
They decided not to perform elective  orthopedic  procedures,  so
they  can  be  able to dedicate the staff, interns, and residents
for cooperating with the corona  team  along  with  the  hospital
policies  and plans. At that time, all orthopedic related activi‐
ties at our department were locked.  Our response to the disaster
needed to be quick and futuristic while covering all concerns si‐
multaneously; For this reason, we decided  to  face  the  problem
from  multiple  aspects. After categorizing it, we met the obsta‐
cles by using the knowledge of the experts and  previous  experi‐
ence  from  our colleagues all around the globe and applying them
considering our facilities and infrastructure.  Knowing the  fact
that  there may be many new obstacles that we will encounter dur‐
ing this combat against one of the most insidious ferocious  dis‐
eases  of  all  time,  in this to this situation in our hospital.
Management of urgent orthopedic cases and  the  orthopedic  work‐
force  Due  to  the  fact that our hospital had become one of the
leading centers for referred COVID‐19 cases in the metropolis  of
Tehran,  our hospital, along with Emergency patients in this hos‐
pital. So most of the patients were referred to  other  hospitals
specialized for orthopedic patients only. As a result, the number
of referring patients to our Emergency  Medicine  Department  was
significantly The next step was to immediately dismiss orthopedic
THE ARCHIVES OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY. ABJS.MUMS.AC.IR VOLUME 8.
SUPPLEMENT  1.  APRIL 2020 OBSTACLES FOR AN ORTHOPEDIC DEPARTMENT
DURING THE COVID‐19 interns to work as a reserved force for coro‐
navirus  clinics.  Orthopedic  resident  shifts were reduced, and
they were asked to help the  corona  treatment  team  instead  of
staying  in  the  emergency room (ER). Simultaneously, they could
participate as on‐call orthopedic  residents  in  their  hospital
shifts.  Consequently, the number of orthopedic patients referred
to ER were reduced to almost no patient a mean of 98 per month to
three  in  late  February and The only routine ongoing orthopedic
operations were necessary amputations in diabetic  foot  patients
and  arthrotomy in patients with septic arthritis. These types of
surgeries were reduced by 90% since the time of crisis  that  pa‐
tients with serious diseases find themselves in it, and they pre‐
fer to stay at home rather  than  being  treated  in  a  hospital
filled  with  COVID‐19  patients.   2019 and March 2020.  Between
April 2019 and March  2020.   THE  ARCHIVES  OF  BONE  AND  JOINT
SURGERY.  ABJS.MUMS.AC.IR  VOLUME 8. SUPPLEMENT 1. APRIL 2020 Al‐
though the number of urgent operations was reduced, there are al‐
ways  many  concerns  about  orthopedic complications in patients
with definite, suspected, or even symptomless  COVID‐19  disease,
which  need  to  be addressed. The challenge between the hospital
deputy of treatment and surgeons in  not  admitting  elective  or
even  less  urgent  orthopedic  cases in the time of the COVID‐19
crisis remains a matter of debate  in  many  centers  around  the
world. The early experience of our colleagues in Singapore was to
cancel and postpone their elective and non‐urgent procedures that
need  admission  for  more than 23 hours (4). Still, they allowed
all surgeries that required less than 23  hours  of  access.  The
protocol  in our department was to postpone all non‐urgent surgi‐
cal operations in the time of the COVID‐19 crisis as much as pos‐
sible  to prevent the nosocomial transmission of the disease, es‐
pecially to elderly patients (5).  Changes  in  the  approach  to
elective  patient  We acknowledge the fact that COVID‐19 is now a
pandemic, and most of the financial and human  resources  of  the
healthcare system should be allocated to prevent the disease from
spreading and also the treatment of affected patients. To achieve
these  goals,  we had to limit the number of orthopedic surgeries
in all elective fields. Our rapid response was to  discharge  the
already  admitted  patients  from  the orthopedic ward.  The main
clinical features at the onset of the disease in  Wuhan  patients
were  described (6). Still, reports were coming from China warned
us that even asymptomatic patients could have a positive  Reverse
Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT‐PCR) test and can in‐
fect others (7‐9). Knowing this fact and acting  accordingly  can
significantly  reduce  the risk of infecting patients and health‐
care providers as both groups could be silent carriers. This  is‐
sue,  along with other concerns such as shortage of anesthesiolo‐
gists as they are currently inevitably  withdrawn  from  elective
surgery.  Besides,  hospital policies dictated that the number of
beds used for orthopedic patients had to be reduced  to  dedicate
beds  and personnel to the new COVID‐19 wards. Finally, we had to
be sure not to infect elective patients with nosocomial COVID‐19.
Therefore, the number of elective surgeries in our operating room
was reduced from 226 per month (mean) to zero  in  late  February
and  March to protect our patients and staff from the active dis‐
ease In the time of epidemic and crisis we contacted our patients
via  phone  calls and recommended them to postpone their elective
surgeries such as arthroplasty and spinal deformities  or  steno‐
sis;  still,  there is a big concern about tumor patients who may
have finished their chemotherapy or biopsy. They may need further
treatment  steps  to  benefit the most from their treatment plan.
Establishing telemedicine in an unprepared society It  is  impor‐
tant  for all orthopedic surgeons to stay aware of their patients
health condition. Telemedicine was introduced to the  world  some
years  ago  and physicians OBSTACLES FOR AN ORTHOPEDIC DEPARTMENT
DURING THE COVID‐19 have been using it more or  less  around  the
world  (10).  In the time of the COVID‐19 epidemic, our hospitals
created a system in which  all  patients  who  underwent  surgery
within  the  past  three months were notified via a short message
text on their phones. The message asked them to contact their or‐
thopedic  surgeon  to  ask  any questions or discuss the possible
problems. Our protocol was to encourage using telemedicine by any
means in all faculty members. The main objective of this telecom‐
munication was to ensure the patients stay at their homes to low‐
er  the possibility of asymptomatic or affected COVID‐19 patients
to spread the disease in the community. Many orthopedic  patients
and  surgeons are in their old ages. The condition has a more fa‐
tality rate in the older population (11). We aimed to  lower  the
risk  of exposing this group of patients as well.  The telecommu‐
nication mentioned above, the Virtual Office  System  (VOS),  was
designed  in  a  way  that postoperative patients of each surgeon
have to be referred to their service and connected to that ortho‐
pedic  surgeon. Doctor‐patient confidentiality is guarded in this
system. Due to limited experience with this system  and  unfamil‐
iarity of the patients with such technology, faculty members were
also encouraged to connect with patients using any secured mobile
or  computer applications. As physiotherapy clinics had also been
shut down, the patients could learn rehabilitation  programs  via
the  VOS. In this method, patients are asked to show their surgi‐
cal scar area on the video‐calls.  Whenever a consulting orthope‐
dic  surgeon suspects a complication such as surgical site infec‐
tion or other emergent conditions, the patient is asked  to  come
to the hospital to be treated accordingly. Management of post‐op‐
erative trauma patients in the time of crisis is  more  challeng‐
ing.  Many of them have lower compliance in having follow‐up ses‐
sions via the VOS. There is also a problem in  writing  follow‐up
x‐rays  for the patients.  Moreover, there are some patients with
non‐emergent conditions such as mal‐ or non‐unions, which is  not
clear how to be managed. Patients who have been managed non‐oper‐
atively will meet the same problems. First, there is a paucity of
contact  information from them in the hospitals, and many of them
were discharged from the emergency  department  or  clinics,  and
their  data  is  not registered like for those who have undergone
surgical procedures. Second, many of them are terrified  to  come
to  our  hospital  because  they are aware that COVID‐19 patients
fill most of the hospital beds. Consequently, we decided to gath‐
er  contact  information  from  the  emergency department and our
clinics. The followup calls were made by each orthopedic  profes‐
sors  senior residents to make sure there will be limited compli‐
cations due to lack of follow‐up.  Management of personal protec‐
tive  equipment  To  protect our patients and hospital personnel,
the hospital board of trustees decided to  create  a  respiratory
triage for patients who has the symptoms of COVID‐19.  After tak‐
ing history and primary vital signs, patients are  either  hospi‐
talized or discharged and sent to quarantine THE ARCHIVES OF BONE
AND JOINT SURGERY. ABJS.MUMS.AC.IR VOLUME 8. SUPPLEMENT 1.  APRIL
2020  according  to  national protocols that were inspired by WHO
guidelines. For those patients with other complaints  and  trauma
patients,  the standard routine care is done in the ER in a sepa‐
rate area from those with suspected COVID‐19 disease. One  should
have in mind that even trauma patient without fever or respirato‐
ry complaints in the emergency department or any other wards  can
be reports from our colleagues that express trauma patients with‐
out a history of fever or respiratory symptoms were found  to  be
COVID‐19  patients  as  well. These patients were mostly detected
post‐operatively, or by accident once there  was  a  chest  X‐ray
followed  by  a  lung CT scan.  Studies have shown that the usual
way of confirming the COVID‐19, which is RT‐PCR, has a sensitivi‐
ty  as  low as 60% (12, 13). One research has shown that patients
with positive RT‐PCR may have a negative CT  scan  in  the  first
three  days  (14).  These  studies  rose  a big concern among WHO
guidelines for PPE for COVID‐19 (15).  Moreover,  our  department
considered  and  warned all staff, including faculties, residents
and operating room nurses to consider all orthopedic patients  in
the  hospital as silent carriers and use precautions at all times
and in cases of visiting a diagnosed COVID‐19 patient or perform‐
ing  operative  or  non‐operative  treatment use PPE as guided by
WHO.  Regarding the fact that there are limited supplies for  PPE
in  the  whole  country and many hospitals in small towns may re‐
quire many essential types of equipment, we decided to be an  ex‐
cellent example in applying the protocols to preserve PPE as much
as possible. One of the ways to minimize  the  use  of  PPE,  ex‐
plained  by  WHO  is by using telemedicine to detect COVID‐19 pa‐
tients (15). We used this method to visit  our  post‐op  patients
and  lower the need of actual post‐operative visits in the hospi‐
tal.  We recommended our orthopedic surgeons and OBSTACLES FOR AN
ORTHOPEDIC  DEPARTMENT  DURING  THE COVID‐19 the time of need. We
believe that the workload on our infectious disease  specialists,
emergency medicine service, and internal medicine service was un‐
bearable.  We were afraid this  burnout  may  cause  irreversible
damages  to both patients and physicians (16). We proudly decided
to stand side‐by‐side to our colleagues in this  critical  condi‐
tion. This made the heart of our colleagues in different branches
of medicine closer, and by orthopedic residents and faculty  mem‐
bers  being  involved in the treatment of COVID‐19 patients, they
gained the chance to practice their learnings as a general physi‐
cian once again along with closeness and teamwork with their oth‐
er colleagues in the hospital. Chang et al.   have  reported  the
same  experience  in  their  hospital in the time of the COVID‐19
pandemic (4).  Continuing our path to train orthopedic  residents
and  medical  students aspects and training medical students, in‐
terns, residents, and nursing students, are inseparable from  pa‐
tients  treatment.  By  limiting the hospital routine educational
tasks to focus on managing COVID‐19 patients, we may put our edu‐
cational  goals  at  stake.  One of the best‐known means to reach
this educational goal is participation in morning  reports  which
are  held five times a week in our center along with two sessions
of arthroplasty meetings week. To protect our interns, residents,
and  attending  surgeons, we decided to reduce the number of face
to face meetings and mornings and use virtual classes to the num‐
ber of attending residents and orthopedic professors decreased to
zero after the initial cancellation of morning  report  sessions,
but  eventually,  we  managed  THE  ARCHIVES  OF  BONE  AND JOINT
SURGERY. ABJS.MUMS.AC.IR VOLUME 8. SUPPLEMENT 1. APRIL  2020  OB‐
STACLES  FOR  AN ORTHOPEDIC DEPARTMENT DURING THE COVID‐19 Report
Sessions in April 2020.  to encourage most of our  residents  and
fellowship orthopedic residents to attend in virtual meetings and
morning sessions (Figur  5;  6).   Unfortunately,  there  is  not
enough  experience  in teaching residents using virtual education
infrastructures among all medical universities around  the  coun‐
try.  Due  to some limitations such as filtering and sanctions we
do not have access to all web‐based  virtual  classroom  applica‐
tions.   To overcome this problem, our department decided to Sci‐
ences to have interactive sessions to continue our important role
in  educating  next‐generation orthopedic We believe that the ac‐
tive participation of orthopedic department faculties in the time
of the COVID‐19 crisis is crucial. Each orthopedic department can
establish a protocol according to  the  hospital  infrastructure,
facilities,  and  WHO  guidelines to encounter the current situa‐
tion.  the orthopedic team by limiting the number of elective THE
ARCHIVES  OF  BONE  AND  JOINT SURGERY. ABJS.MUMS.AC.IR VOLUME 8.
SUPPLEMENT 1. APRIL 2020 OBSTACLES FOR AN  ORTHOPEDIC  DEPARTMENT
DURING  THE COVID‐19 surgeries and converting the previous treat‐
ments and educational systems to more virtually  based  education
and  patient  visits.   Conflict  of  interests: None.  Seyedhadi
Kalantar MD1 Amirreza Farhoud MD1 SM Javad Mortazavi MD1 1  Joint
Reconstruction  Research  Center,  Tehran 1. Sohrabi C, Alsafi Z,
ONeill N, Khan M, Kerwan A, AlJabir A, et al. World Health  Orga‐
nization  declares  coronavirus  (COVID‐19).  Int  J  Surg. 2020;
76(1):71‐6.  2. World Health  Organization.  Coronavirus  disease
2019  :  situation report, 51. Geneva: World Health Organization;
2020.  3. Dietz L, Horve PF, Coil D, Fretz M, Van Den Wymelenberg
K.  2019 novel coronavirus (COVID‐19) outbreak: a (BE) considera‐
tions to reduce transmission. Preprints.  4. Chang  LZ,  Wang  W,
Murphy  D,  Po Hui JH. Novel coronavirus and orthopaedic surgery:
early experiences from Singapore. J Bone Joint Surg Am.  2020; In
Press.   5. Wang Y, Wang Y, Chen Y, Qin Q. Unique epidemiological
and clinical features of  the  emerging  2019  novel  coronavirus
pneumonia (COVID19) implicate special control measures. J Med Vi‐
rol. 2020; In Press.  6. Wang D, Hu B, Hu C, Zhu F, Liu X,  Zhang
J,  et  al. Clinical characteristics of 138 hospitalized patients
with 2019 novel coronavirusinfected pneumonia  in  Wuhan,  China.
JAMA.  2020;  In Press.  7. Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia Emergency
Response Epidemiology Team. The  epidemiological  characteristics
of  an  outbreak of 2019 novel coronavirus diseases (COVID‐19) in
China. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za 8. Chan JF, Yuan S, Kok  KH,
To KK, Chu H, Yang J, et al.  A familial cluster of pneumonia as‐
sociated with the 2019 novel  coronavirus  indicating  person‐to‐
person  transmission:  a study of a family cluster. Lancet. 2020;
9. Liu YC, Liao CH, Chang CF, Chou CC, Lin YR. A  locally  trans‐
mitted  case  of  SARS‐CoV‐2  infection  in Taiwan. N Engl J Med.
2020;   382(11):1070‐2.    10.   World    Health    Organization.
Telemedicine:  opportunities  and  developments in member states.
Report on the second global  survey  on  eHealth.  Geneva:  World
Health  Organization; 2010.  11. Kobayashi T, Jung SM, Linton NM,
Kinoshita R, Hayashi K, Miyama T, et al. Communicating  the  risk
of death from novel coronavirus disease (COVID‐19). J Clin 12. Ai
T, Yang Z, Hou H, Zhan C, Chen C, Lv W, et  al.   Correlation  of
chest   CT   and  RT‐PCR  testing  in  coronavirus  disease  2019
(COVID‐19) in China: a report of  1014  cases.  Radiology.  2020;
26(1):200642.  13. Fang Y, Zhang H, Xie J, Lin M, Ying L, Pang P,
et al.  Sensitivity of chest CT for COVID‐19: comparison  to  RT‐
PCR. Radiology. 2020; In Press.  14. Yang W, Yan F. Patients with
RT‐PCR confirmed COVID‐19 and normal chest CT.  Radiology.  2020;
In  15.  World Health Organization. Rational use of personal pro‐
tective equipment for  coronavirus  disease  (COVID‐19):  interim
guidance,  27  February 2020.  Geneva: World Health Organization;
2020.  16. Wong AM. Beyond burnout: looking deeply into physician
distress. Can J Ophthalmol. 2020; In Press.

















































