COPYRIGHT 2020  BY THE ARCHIVES OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY CURRENT
CONCEPTS REVIEW Molecular Aspects of Co‐morbidities  in  COVID‐19
Farzaneh  Pouya, MSc1, 2; Zeynab Imani Saber, MSc3; Mohammad Amin
Kerachian, MD, PhD1, 2 Coronaviruses are  a  group  of  enveloped
viruses  with  single‐stranded  non‐segmented  positive‐sense RNA
genomes. In December 2019, SARS‐CoV‐2 appeared in China  for  the
first time and quickly spread throughout the world. Although cer‐
tain medications suggested for other afflictions tend to  be  po‐
tentially  effective  for  curing  the infection, there is no ap‐
proved vaccination or drug available for this virus yet.  Compre‐
hension  of the disease molecular pathogenesis could provide use‐
ful tools  for  COVID‐19  patients  in  surveillance,  prognosis,
treatment,  vaccine  development  and  therapeutic targeting. The
present research aims to summarize the  association  in  COVID‐19
patients between molecular dimensions of comorbidities with clin‐
ical and preclinical information.  Developing an  ACE2  inhibitor
could be a possible therapeutic target. Plasmin is another possi‐
ble candidate both in diagnosis and treatment areas. All predict‐
ed  biomarkers must be validated either through randomized clini‐
cal trials or experimental assays before clinical application  in
patients.  Level of evidence: V Keywords: Cancer, Cardiovascular,
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, COVID‐19, Diabetes  melli‐
tus,  Hypertension n December 2019, a novel zoonotic COVID‐19 be‐
longing to the Orthocoronavirinae subfamily and distinct from Se‐
vere Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (SARS‐CoV) and Middle
East Respiratory Syndrome  Coronavirus  (MERS‐CoV)  was  reported
first  in  Wuhan,  China,  which  became  a global emergence (1).
COVID‐19 could cause symptoms ranging from common cold  to  Acute
Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS).  Despite the high transmis‐
sion and mortality rate (2.1%), there is no vaccine or  treatment
developed yet (2). Severe conditions tend to occur in older males
and patients with one or more  co‐morbidities  such  as  diabetes
mellitus (DM), hypertension, cerebrovascular disease, and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (3). The aim of the  present
study  is  to summarize the correlation between molecular aspects
of comorbidities and clinical evidences in COVID‐19  patients  to
provide  resources  in vaccine production and therapeutic target‐
ing.  Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine,  Mash‐
had   Chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease  association  with
COVID‐19 severity Patients with COPD are predisposed to a signif‐
icant,  over five‐fold enhanced risk of severe COVID‐19 infection
(4).  The  connecting  link  between  preexistence  of  COPD  and
COVID‐19  severity  is  possibly  angiotensin converting enzyme 2
(ACE2). ACE2 is an integral membrane glycoprotein that is consti‐
tutively  expressed  by  the epithelial cells of the pneumocytes,
nephrocytes, and endothelium. To regulate both the  cross‐species
and  human‐to‐human  transmissions of SARS‐CoV, the spike protein
receptor‐binding domain (RBD) in SARSCoV can  interact  with  its
host  receptor,  ACE2. Well knowledge about SARS‐CoV and its high
homology with COVID‐19 strongly suggest that COVID‐19  uses  ACE2
as  its  receptor  to  bind  with RBD (particularly Gln493) cell.
Moreover, identification of other critical residues suggests that
COVID‐19  recruit  multiple  capacities (e.g.  Arch Bone Jt Surg.
2020;   8   (Supplement   1):    226‐230.    Doi:    10.22038/ab‐
js.2020.47828.2361  THE  ARCHIVES  OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY. AB‐
JS.MUMS.AC.IR VOLUME 8. SUPPLEMENT 1. APRIL 2020 Asn501) for  hu‐
man‐to‐human transmission. It could justify the high transmission
entity of COVID‐19 (5).  These findings provide insights into re‐
ceptor usage as possible preventive measures and therapeutic tar‐
gets in COPD patients infected with COVID‐19. Single cell  immune
profiling describes interferon‐ MAPK signaling pathway as the ma‐
jor blood immune response for viral infection  such  as  COVID‐19
(1,  6, 7). High expression level of FOS and IRF27 (as MAPK tran‐
scription factors) suggest that there can be a  candidate  marker
gene  for  cured  COVID‐19  patients  (1). Another transcriptomic
study reveals strong crosslink between COVID‐19 pathogenesis  and
excessive  cytokine  release  such  as  CCL2/MCP‐1, CXCL10/IP‐10,
CCL3/MIP‐1A, and CCL4/ MIP1B. Furthermore, COVID‐19 activates P53
signaling  pathway  in lymphocytes which is a possible reason for
lymphopenia in COVID‐19 patients (8).  A  comprehensive  computa‐
tional analysis described that IL6, TNF, CXCL8, IFNG, CCL5, IL10,
CCL2, ICAM1, CXCL1 and CXCR4 are  involved  in  lung  disease  of
high‐risk patients of COVID‐19 as top key genes and the predicted
drug treatment is Plerixafor (9). All above would suggest a  pos‐
sible biomarker in COVID‐19 management.  Diabetes mellitus in the
context of COVID‐19 Cellular innate immunity, the first  line  of
defense  against COVID‐19, is extensively harmed in patients with
uncontrolled DM (10).  ACE2 is responsible to convert angiotensin
II  into  angiotensin 17 that leads to vasodilation. DM is linked
to activation of renin‐angiotensin‐aldosterone system  (RAAS)  in
various  tissues.  Moreover,  patients with DM widely use ACE in‐
hibitors (ACEi) and angiotensin receptor blockers  (ARBs),  which
have  benefit in COVID‐19 alleviation (11). We can conclude that,
application of ARB is speculated as a potential therapeutic  tar‐
get for COVID19 (12). Both types I and II diabetes are associated
with elevated plasmin(ogen) levels in plasma (13).  Studies  sug‐
gest that high level of Furin in plasma could lead to dysmetabol‐
ic conditions particularly DM (14).  As we  will  discuss  below,
Furin level of plasma would be elevated by COVID‐19 infection. We
can conclude that, Furin is an important key in COVID‐19 clinical
severity  predisposed by diabetes.  A meta‐analysis investigation
proposed IL, TNF, CXCL8, IL10, CCL2, ICAM1, IFNG,  IL2,  FN1  and
CXCR4  as  top  key genes for the diabetic high‐risk patients and
introduced Plerixafor, Quinine, Pentoxifylline, and Rapamycin  as
repurposed  drugs  in DM patients infected by COVID‐19 (9).  Car‐
diovascular and hypertension precondition Cardiovascular and  hy‐
pertension are two other ACE2 associated diseases which adversely
affect the COVID‐19 prognosis (15). ACE2 cleaves angiotensin  II,
a  peptide with multiple actions that promote cardiovascular dis‐
ease. RASS blocker and ACEi are  widely  used  in  cardiovascular
disease and hypertension treatment.  Patients with cardiovascular
disease are predisposed to more severe COVID‐19  infection  (16).
CO‐MORBIDITIES  IN COVID‐19 The top ten major genes for hyperten‐
sion high‐risk patients includes: VEGFA, IL6,  TNF,  CCL2,  MMP9,
ALB,  IL10,  PTGS2, CXCL8, CASP3 and the predicted drugs were Pa‐
clitaxel, Thalidomide, and Rapamycin. The key genes  involved  in
heart  disease  high‐risk group of COVID‐19 were IL6, TNF, CXCL8,
CCL2, MAPK1 EGFR, ICAM1, CCL5, CXCR4, AGT and the predicted drugs
were  Plerixafor,  Afatinib,  Gefitinib, Paclitaxel, and Cortisol
(9).  Systemic thrombosis in circulatory  system  and  hemorrhage
results  in multi‐organ failure in COVID‐19 patients. Hyperfibri‐
nolysis is a characteristic of COVID‐19 resulting from  increased
level of D‐dimer (as a coagulation index) (17, 18). COVID‐19 uses
its receptor‐binding domain structure in the Spike (S) protein to
attach   to   the   host   ACE2.  The  Furin‐like  cleavage  site
(682RRAR/S686) exclusively exists in the S1/S2 protease  cleavage
site  of the COVID‐19 virus (not in SARS‐CoV). The S1 site of the
Spike protein is responsible for attachment  to  the  human  host
cell  ACE2 receptor, whereas the S2 region is responsible for the
fusion of the viral RNA to human cell  membranes  (19).  Plasmin,
and  TMPRSS  proteases  may cleave the S‐protein of coronaviruses
which can increase virus entrance into the  bronchial  epithelial
cells  (20).  Plasmin cleaves human ENaC subunit in trypsin, chy‐
motrypsin, prostasin, and  elastases  (21).  Increased  level  of
plasmin  results  in  hyperproduction  of  ENaC in the collecting
tubule, which enhances salt retention, contributing to renal  hy‐
pertension  (22). On the other hand, ENaC proteins are located in
the apical surfaces of respiratory epithelium. Since ENaC is  re‐
sponsible  for  Na+  entrance  to  epithelial  cells  and plasmin
cleaves ENaC both on events lead to  dehydration  of  respiratory
epithelium  and hypertension, two major events in severe COVID‐19
(23, 24). In‐vitro studies demonstrated  a  serine  protease  in‐
hibitor  for  plasmin  and  TMPRSS2  which can block S‐protein of
COVID‐19 entry to the  host  cells  (25).   Assessment  of  plas‐
min(ogen)  levels and its enzymatic activity could be appropriate
biomarkers for COVID‐19 severity in addition to resultant D‐dimer
(18).  We can conclude that, elevated levels of plasmin(ogen) may
be a bridge between COVID‐19 severity and hypertension  and  ARDS
predisposing  disease which could be a good purpose in both prog‐
nosis and treatment area.  Cancer high‐risk patient  of  COVID‐19
Investigations  reveal  that  patients  suffering from cancer are
more susceptible to COVID‐19 infection and have a poorer  progno‐
sis  due  to immunosuppressive state caused by neoplasm and anti‐
cancer therapies (26). A comprehensive  gene‐disease  association
study  introduces  VEGFA,  STAT3,  IL6, TNF, MAPK3, MAPK1, CASP3,
MMP9, PTGS, and EGF as important genes in  cancer  high‐risk  pa‐
tients of COVID‐19 and offers Gentamicin, Hydroxychloroquine, So‐
rafenib, Sulindac,  Thalidomide,  Erlotinib,  and  Vandetanib  as
drugs  in  this  group (9).  The antiviral effects of interferons
are largely mediated by the JAKSTAT signaling pathway (27). Also,
Jak2 mutations describe clinical significances in myeloprolifera‐
tive neoplasms and leukemia (28). Baricitinib, a  tumor  necrosis
factor  (TNF) antagonist which acts as Jak1 and Jak2 THE ARCHIVES
OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY. ABJS.MUMS.AC.IR VOLUME  8.  SUPPLEMENT
1.  APRIL 2020 CO‐MORBIDITIES IN COVID‐19 COVID‐19 S‐glycoprotein
underlying increase the ability of  attachment  between  COVID‐19
and  its  human host cell receptor, ACE2, result in virus attach‐
ment and fusion. Plasmin also can cleave fibrin  and  produce  D‐
dimer  both in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and plasma, result in
hemorrhage. ENaC is located on apical surface of alveolar epithe‐
lium  and  is  responsible  for Na+ entrance to epithelial cells.
Plasmin cleaves ENaC both on respiratory epithelium and  endothe‐
lium  of  veins  results in dehydration of respiratory epithelium
and hypertension.  inhibitor, is widely used in the treatment  of
rheumatoid  arthritis (29). All above, we speculate that applica‐
tion of Baricitinib could be a possible  effective  treatment  in
patients who are positive for Jak mutations and are infected with
COVID‐19 (30, 31). Approximately 80% of  patients  with  COVID‐19
can  clear  virus largely through interferons and remain asympto‐
matic or with mild symptoms. We do not recommend  Baricitinib  or
other Jak inhibitors for this group of patients. However, in mod‐
erate to severe cases, the maximum load of virus  occurs  7  days
after symptom onset, and later that we can clinically observe the
severe phase of the disease due to hyper  inflammation  which  is
so‐called  Cytokine storm. Cytokine storm occurs through enhanced
levels of interferons  and  and IL‐6, all of which  are  involved
in  JAKSTAT signaling pathway (32). These evidences suggest that,
JAKSTAT pathway inhibition (such as Baricitinib), may be  an  ap‐
propriate  treatment  approach in hospitalized patients (moderate
to severe cases) (33). These findings  are  consistent  with  the
similar  studies  on  SARS‐CoV  and  MERS‐CoV  (34,  35).  In our
present study, gene‐disease association related to COVID‐19 symp‐
toms, clinical outcomes, and risk factors were studied. Since the
only treatment  of  COVID‐19  is  supportive,  understanding  the
molecular  pathogenesis of the COVID‐19 infections in susceptible
patients could lead to achieve both diagnostic biomarkers in ear‐
ly  stage of the disease and targeted therapeutic markers. Devel‐
oping an ACE2 inhibitor could be a possible  therapeutic  target.
Plasmin  is  another  possible  candidate  both  in diagnosis and
treatment areas. All predicted biomarkers must be  validated  ei‐
ther  through  randomized clinical trials or through experimental
assays before being used in  patients.   Conflict  of  interests:
None.   This  study was supported financially by Mashhad Farzaneh
Pouya MSc1, 2 Zeynab Imani Saber MSc3 Mohammad Amin Kerachian  MD
PhD1,  2 of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran 2 Department of Medi‐
cal Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, 3 Department of Medical Genet‐
ics, Faculty of Medicine, THE ARCHIVES OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY.
ABJS.MUMS.AC.IR VOLUME 8. SUPPLEMENT 1. APRIL 2020 CO‐MORBIDITIES
IN COVID‐19 1. Huang L, Shi Y, Gong B, Jiang L, Liu X, Yang J, et
al. Blood single cell immune profiling reveals the interferonMAPK
pathway  mediated adaptive immune response for COVID‐19. medRxiv.
2020.  2. Chan JF‐W, Yuan S, Kok K‐H, To KK‐W, Chu H, Yang J,  et
al. A familial cluster of pneumonia associated with the 2019 nov‐
el coronavirus indicating person‐to‐person transmission: a  study
of  a  family  cluster. The Lancet.  3. Tetro JA. Is COVID‐19 re‐
ceiving ADE from other coronaviruses? Microbes and Infection.  4.
Lippi G, Henry BM. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is asso‐
ciated with severe coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‐19).  Respira‐
tory  Medicine.  2020.  5. Wan Y, Shang J, Graham R, Baric RS, Li
F. Receptor recognition by the novel coronavirus from  Wuhan:  an
analysis  based on decade‐long structural studies 6. Unterholzner
L. The interferon response to intracellular DNA: why so many  re‐
ceptors?   7. Kroczynska B, Mehrotra S, Arslan AD, Kaur S, Plata‐
nias LC. Regulation of  interferon‐dependent  mRNA  Cytokine  Re‐
search. 2014;34(4):289‐96.  8. Xiong Y, Liu Y, Cao L, Wang D, Guo
M, Jiang A,  et  al.   Transcriptomic  characteristics  of  bron‐
choalveolar  lavage  fluid and peripheral blood mononuclear cells
in COVID‐19 patients. Emerging Microbes & Infections.   9.  Kumar
S.  COVID‐19:  A drug repurposing and biomarker identification by
using comprehensive gene‐disease  associations  through  protein‐
protein  interaction  network  analysis.  2020.  10. Ma RCW, Holt
RIG. COVID‐19 and diabetes.  11. Fang L, Karakiulakis G, Roth  M.
Are patients with hypertension and diabetes mellitus at increased
risk for COVID‐19 infection? The Lancet Respiratory 12. Zhang  H,
Penninger  JM, Li Y, Zhong N, Slutsky AS.  Angiotensin‐converting
enzyme 2 (ACE2) as a SARSCoV‐2 receptor: molecular mechanisms and
potential  therapeutic target. Intensive Care Medicine. 2020:1‐5.
13. Ray EC, Miller RG, Demko JE, Costacou T, Kinlough  CL,  Demko
CL,  et al. Urinary plasmin (ogen) as a prognostic factor for hy‐
pertension. Kidney international reports.  14. Fernandez  C,  Rys
J, Almgren P, Nilsson J, Engstrm G, OrhoMelander M, et al. Plasma
levels of the proprotein convertase furin and  incidence  of  15.
Chen  X,  Hu W, Ling J, Mo P, Zhang Y, Jiang Q, et al.  Hyperten‐
sion and Diabetes Delay the Viral Clearance in COVID‐19 Patients.
medRxiv.  2020.  16. South AM, Diz D, Chappell MC. COVID‐19, ACE2
and the Cardiovascular Consequences. American Physiological Soci‐
ety  Rockville, MD; 2020.  17. Chen N, Zhou M, Dong X, Qu J, Gong
F, Han Y, et al. Epidemiological and clinical characteristics  of
99  cases  of 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a
descriptive study. The Lancet.  18. Ji H‐L, Zhao  R,  Matalon  S,
Matthay  MA.  Elevated plasmin (ogen) as a common risk factor for
COVID‐19 19. Coutard B, Valle C, de Lamballerie X, Canard B, Sei‐
dah  N,  Decroly E. The spike glycoprotein of the new coronavirus
2019‐nCoV contains a furin‐like cleavage site absent  in  CoV  of
the  same clade. Antiviral 20. Kam Y‐W, Okumura Y, Kido H, Ng LF,
Bruzzone R, Altmeyer R. Cleavage of the  SARS  coronavirus  spike
glycoprotein  by airway proteases enhances virus entry into human
bronchial epithelial cells in vitro.  PloS one. 2009;4(11).   21.
Zhao  R, Ali G, Nie HG, Chang Y, Bhattarai D, Su X, et al.  Plas‐
min improves oedematous bloodgas barrier by 22. Oxlund  CS,  Buhl
KB,  Jacobsen  IA,  Hansen  MR,  Gram  J,  Henriksen  JE,  et al.
Amiloride lowers blood pressure and attenuates urine  plasminogen
activation in patients with treatmentresistant hypertension.  23.
Kleyman TR, Kashlan OB, Hughey RP. Epithelial Na+ channel regula‐
tion  by  extracellular and intracellular 24. Matthay MA, Aldrich
JM, Gotts JE. Treatment for  severe  acute  respiratory  distress
syndrome  from  COVID‐19.  The Lancet Respiratory Medicine. 2020.
25. Hoffmann M, Kleine‐Weber H, Schroeder S, Krger N, Herrler  T,
Erichsen  S, et al. SARS‐CoV‐2 cell entry depends on ACE2 and TM‐
PRSS2 and is blocked by a clinically proven  protease  inhibitor.
Cell.  2020.  26. Liang W, Guan W, Chen R, Wang W, Li J, Xu K, et
al. Cancer patients in SARS‐CoV‐2 infection: a nationwide  analy‐
sis  in China. The Lancet Oncology.  27. Di Bona D, Cippitelli M,
Fionda C, Camm C, Licata A, Santoni A, et  al.  Oxidative  stress
inhibits  IFN‐‐induced  antiviral gene expression by blocking the
JAKSTAT 28. Tefferi A. Novel mutations and their  functional  and
clinical  relevance  in  myeloproliferative neoplasms: JAK2, MPL,
TET2, ASXL1, CBL, IDH and IKZF1.  29. Genovese MC, Kremer J,  Za‐
mani  O, Ludivico C, Krogulec M, Xie L, et al. Baricitinib in pa‐
tients THE ARCHIVES OF BONE AND  JOINT  SURGERY.  ABJS.MUMS.AC.IR
VOLUME  8.  SUPPLEMENT  1.  APRIL 2020 with refractory rheumatoid
arthritis. N Engl J Med.  30. Stebbing J, Phelan  A,  Griffin  I,
Tucker  C, Oechsle O, Smith D, et al. COVID‐19: combining antivi‐
ral and anti‐inflammatory treatments. The Lancet  Infectious  31.
Favalli  EG,  Biggioggero M, Maioli G, Caporali R.  Lancet Infec‐
tious Diseases. 2020.  32. Mehta P, McAuley DF, Brown M,  Sanchez
E,  Tattersall  RS,  Manson JJ. COVID‐19: consider cytokine storm
syndromes and immunosuppression. The Lancet.  33.  Richardson  P,
Griffin  I,  Tucker  C,  Smith  D,  Oechsle  O, CO‐MORBIDITIES IN
COVID‐19 Phelan A, et al. Baricitinib as potential treatment  for
2019‐nCoV acute respiratory disease. The Lancet.  34. Cameron MJ,
Ran L, Xu L, Danesh A, BermejoMartin JF, Cameron CM, et  al.  In‐
terferon‐mediated  immunopathological  events are associated with
atypical innate and adaptive immune responses  in  patients  with
severe  acute  respiratory  syndrome.  35. Channappanavar R, Fehr
AR, Zheng J, WohlfordLenane C, Abrahante JE, Mack M, et al. IFN‐I
response  timing  relative  to  virus replication determines MERS
clinical investigation. 2019;129(9).










































