Open Access Case
Coronavirus (COVID-19) Fulminant
Myopericarditis and Acute Respiratory
Distress Syndrome (ARDS) in a Middle-Aged
Male Patient
Hussain Hussain 1 , Aya Fadel 2 , Haidar Alwaeli 3 , Victor Guardiola 4
1. Internal Medicine, Cardiology Clinic, Pasadena, USA 2. Internal Medicine, Florida International
York, USA 4. Oncology, Baptist Health South Florida, Miami, USA
Myopericarditis remains a prominent infectious inflammatory disorder throughout a patient’s
lifetime. Moreover, viral pathogens have been proven to be the leading contributors to
myopericarditis in the pediatric and adult populations. Despite the current comprehensive
knowledge of myocardial injury in viral and post-viral myopericarditis, the cellular and
molecular mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2-induced myopericarditis are poorly understood. This
report presents a case of coronavirus (COVID-19) fulminant myopericarditis and acute
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) in a middle-aged male patient: a 51-year-old man with a
history of hypertension who arrived to the emergency department with a dry cough, fatigue,
dyspnea, and a fever. A real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
assay confirmed a diagnosis of COVID-19 infection, resulting in the patient’s admission to the
airborne isolation unit for clinical observation. When his condition began to deteriorate, the
patient was transferred to the cardiac care unit after electrocardiography detected cardiac
injury, demonstrating diffuse ST-segment elevation. Laboratory evaluations revealed elevated
troponin T and BNP, with an echocardiogram indicating global left ventricular hypokinesia and
a reduced ejection fraction. The patient was treated with hydroxychloroquine, azithromycin,
dobutamine, remdesivir, and ventilatory support. This specific case highlights the severity and
complications that may arise as a direct result of COVID-19 infection.
Categories: Cardiology, Infectious Disease, Pulmonology
Keywords: coronavirus disease (covid-19), diffuse st elevation, myocarditis, sars-cov-2 (severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus -2), ards, myopericarditis
Hussain et al. This is an open access
unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), a viral respiratory disease of possible zoonotic origin
that surfaced in 2019, is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARSCoV-2) [1]. Patients with confirmed severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus SARS-CoV-2
infection can present with flu-like symptoms that may include a fever, lethargy, anosmia,
ageusia, rhinorrhea, myalgia, a dry cough, a sore throat, and other nonspecific symptoms such
as diarrhea or abdominal pain [1]. Severe complications of COVID-19 infection include
pneumonia, respiratory failure from acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), septic shock,
and acute myopericarditis [1-2]. This report presents a middle-aged male patient diagnosed
with COVID-19 who, unfortunately, did not survive, addressing the data from the patient’s
admission until his expiration.
Hussain H, Fadel A, Alwaeli H, et al. (June 24, 2020) Coronavirus (COVID-19) Fulminant Myopericarditis
and Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) in a Middle-Aged Male Patient. Cureus 12(6): e8808.
Case Presentation
Clinical history
A 51-year-old middle-aged Italian man with a history of hypertension presented to the
emergency department with a dry cough, fatigue, dyspnea, and a fever. He denied having any
travel history, chills, diaphoresis, chest pain, or change in bowel or urinary habits. He also
reported having multiple episodes of epigastric pain and nausea that had partially improved
with omeprazole treatment two days prior to hospitalization. Upon his arrival to the emergency
department, a physical examination revealed a body temperature of 39.6 °C, a respiratory rate
of 26 breaths/min, a blood pressure of 141/89 mmHg, a heart rate of 97 beats/min, and an
oxygen saturation of 91% (>95%) while the patient was breathing ambient air. An arterial gas
analysis indicated a pH of 7.44 (7.36-7.44), an oxygen partial pressure of 79 mmHg (75-100
mmHg), and a carbon dioxide partial pressure of 39 mmHg (35-45 mmHg). Auscultation of the
chest uncovered bilateral wheezing and rhonchi. Agonal respiration and a symmetrical
decrease in chest expansion were noted as well.
The complete blood count test findings were normal, except for lymphopenia (920
lymphocytes/microliter). Since pneumonia was suspected, the patient was started on oxygen
therapy, continuous electronic vital signs monitoring, an acetaminophen intravenous (IV) drip,
ceftriaxone, and vancomycin. A nasopharyngeal swab was collected and tested for severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS) associated coronavirus using the reverse transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) method, and a positive result was obtained. In coordination with
emergency medical services, hospital leadership and staff decided to discontinue the patient’s
antibiotic treatments. The patient was then transferred to the airborne isolation unit for
clinical observation.
On the first night of admission, the patient’s condition continued to worsen, and he received a
more comprehensive evaluation. His physical examination revealed a respiratory rate of 29
breaths/min, a blood pressure of 134/87 mmHg, a heart rate of 120 beats/min, and an oxygen
saturation of 84%. The patient was started on continuous positive airway pressure and the
antiviral drug remdesivir to improve his oxygen saturation and halt the progression of the
During his second day of hospitalization, the patient remained febrile (a body temperature of
39.1 °C) and hypoxemic (an oxygen saturation of 81%) and required mechanical ventilation. A
posteroanterior chest X-ray exposed bilateral and peripheral ground-glass and consolidative
pulmonary opacities. These radiographic findings explain the progressive deterioration in the
electrocardiography, troponin, and creatine kinase myocardial band (CK-MB) tests provided
normal results.
with coronavirus infection establishing severe ARDS.
CT: Computer Tomography; IV: Intravenous; ARDS: Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome.
PA: Posteroanterior; ARDS: Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome.
The following day, the patient’s condition continued to deteriorate, and no improvements were
noted. On examination, he appeared unwell: his vital signs revealed a body temperature of 37.8
°C, a blood pressure of 138/93 mmHg, a heart rate of 93 beats/min, and an oxygen saturation of
83% while he was on a ventilator. Additional medical therapies were initiated based on existing
practice guidelines. The patient’s medications were reconciled, and hydroxychloroquine and
azithromycin were added. No significant improvements were noted on the following day.
On the fifth day of admission, a comprehensive physical examination presented normal vital
sign findings, except for an oxygen saturation of 87% and a respiratory rate of 26 breaths/min.
Interestingly, the continuous electronic vital signs monitor revealed an extensive and diffuse
ST-segment elevation finding, which prompted the medical team to order electrocardiography,
coronary angiography, and echocardiography. Coronary angiography confirmed a normal
supply of blood to the heart and no signs of any arterial obstruction. However, an
echocardiography indicated an enlarged heart with a marked decrease in ventricular systolic
function and an ejection fraction of 20%. Furthermore, elevated levels of troponin (0.29
ng/mL), creatine kinase myocardial band (CK-MB) (20.1 ng/mL) and N-terminal pro-hormone
brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP), (BNP; 1,287 pg/mL) were detected. These findings
suggested acute myopericarditis, and inotropic support (dobutamine) was thus initiated.
EKG: Electrocardiography; ST: ST segment.
improvement. Physical exam findings confirmed bilateral lower extremity pitting edema, a
blood pressure of 130/83 mmHg, a heart rate of 88 beats/minute, and an oxygen saturation of
89%. The patient remained on continuous mechanical ventilation and his current medications.
Additionally, he was started on a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID; indomethacin,
50 mg t.d.s.) on the seventh day of hospitalization to treat acute myopericarditis.
Overall, the patient’s medical condition deteriorated over the following days of his
hospitalization, suggesting no dramatic response to his current therapy. His EKGs also
continued to demonstrate diffuse ST-segment elevation, and pericardial friction rub was
audible upon cardiac auscultation. A cardiac biomarkers laboratory test revealed an increase in
troponin (18 ng/mL) and creatine kinase myocardial band (CK-MB) was 14.7 ng/mL, indicating
myocardial injury and recurrent myopericarditis. Intravenous methylprednisolone and
colchicine were therefore added to the current treatment plan. Repeated echocardiogram
exposed a marked decrease in ejection fraction (23%) but no evidence of cardiac tamponade.
Chest radiography suggested worsening of the underlying ARDS with bilateral pleural effusion.
The patient continued to be managed with aggressive intravenous fluid resuscitation,
dobutamine, NSAIDs, antibiotics, and antiviral medications.
illnesses, from the common cold to more severe respiratory diseases. Found in various species,
coronaviruses can produce assorted pathological presentations in each species. All coronavirus
subgroups have unique antigenic determinants, culturing requirements, and antigenic crossreactions between each group, which ensure the virus’s survival and aid in its transmission and
proliferation [1].
shape of Coronaviridae with the spikes.
Credit: NIAID
(yellow) emerging from the surface of the cell (blue/pink).
Credit: NIAID
second are known for their ability to infect humans and pigs, whereas the third is detected
primarily in birds [2]. The first two subgroups of the human coronavirus contain four of the six
virus strains that infect humans, including 229E, NL63, OC43, and HKU1, all of which are
responsible for most coronavirus-related pneumonia and common cold symptoms. Severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and Middle East respiratory syndrome
coronavirus (MERS-CoV) are responsible for human-related coronavirus infections less often
but cause a more profound and devastating outcome [2].
Moreover, coronavirus is an enveloped, positive-stranded RNA about 80-120 mm in diameter.
The membrane of the virus consists of four main types of structural proteins. The spike (S) in
N-linked glycosylated protein is responsible for the fusion and mediation of the host cell
receptor’s attachment. In addition, the membrane (M) protein is the most abundant structural
protein that surrounds the membrane multiple times; it has an N-terminal ectodomain and a
cytoplasmic tail that aids in membrane curvature and nucleocapsid binding. The membrane (E)
protein is a highly hydrophobic protein responsible for providing a dense protective barrier that
facilitates the assembly and release of virions. Finally, the nucleocapsid (N) protein is a heavily
phosphorylated protein responsible for binding to the viral genome and forming the so-called
“beads on a string” structure within the viral membrane [2].
internal helical ribonucleic acid (RNA)-protein nucleocapsid
surrounded by an envelope containing viral glycoproteins.
Nucleocapsid (N) protein is a phosphoprotein that is
complexed with genome RNA to form the nucleocapsid. Spike
glycoprotein (S) forms the large glycosylated peplomers that
are characteristic of coronaviruses. M, the transmembrane
protein, is highly hydrophobic and spans the membrane
multiple times. E, a membrane-spanning protein, is a minor
component of the membrane. Some group II viruses express
another glycoprotein, hemagglutinin-esterase (HE), which
forms smaller spikes on virions.
Image reproduction approved by Scientific Animation
spike protein [3]. After the attachment process is completed, a series of conformational changes
in the spike protein’s structure mediates the fusion between the virus and the cell membrane,
which eventually leads to the release of the nucleocapsids into the cell. Once the viral entry
process is achieved, the viral genomic RNA begins the translation process by utilizing viral
replicas polyproteins pp1a and pp1ab [3]. These sets of proteins are then cleaved into small
subunits with the help of viral proteinase enzymes. Polymerase enzymes simultaneously
generate several mRNA products through discontinuous transcription to prepare for the
translation phase. Viral proteins and genomic RNA are subsequently assembled and packaged
into virions in the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi apparatus of the cells. Finally, virions
are transported out of the cells by utilizing the vesicular transportation system [3].
coronavirus attaches to the host’s angiotensin converting
enzyme (ACE2) cell receptor. Furthermore, it highlights the
different steps in the replication, translation processes and the
mechanism of the drugs that have been used recently. These
important steps occur with the assistance of the host’s RNA
polymerase enzymes. The products are then packaged inside
the cellular compartments known as the endoplasmic
reticulum and the Golgi apparatus. After this process is
completed, the replicated virus utilizes the vesicle trafficking
system to undergo exocytosis and infect other host cells.
RNA: Ribonucleic acid
Image reproduction by Gene Tex
Credit: Gene Tex
The virions that escape the local immunological defense system result in a disseminated
using fine branching blood vessel networks known as capillaries. The virus then utilizes the
body’s natural defense system to transmit respiratory infections to a potential host through
droplets produced by exhaling, sneezing, and coughing [4]. Patients infected with coronavirus
most often present with various symptoms, including a high spiking fever, a dry cough, a runny
nose, and fatigue [4]. Other less common but more severe symptoms include dyspnea,
headaches, chest pain, confusion, cyanosis, and restlessness. Patients can also present with
nonspecific symptoms, such as epigastric pain, diarrhea, nausea, or palpitations. On rare
occasions, coronaviruses can lead to death by directly affecting the cardiovascular system,
inducing myopericarditis, altering myocardial contractility, and leading to a drastic reduction
in ejection fraction [4]. The first coronavirus subtype that had a destructive effect on the
respiratory system is known as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS-CoV) which impacted
most countries around the world in 2002 [5]. Other form of coronaviruses includes Middle East
respiratory syndrome (MERS-CoV) which began in Saudi Arabia and later spread to other
countries [6]. Severe acute respiratory coronavirus 2 (COVID-19), which initially began in
China, now has been able to spread and expand at an astonishing rate [7]. However, the most
common cause of death in patients with COVD-19 infection is ARDS [8].
A life-threatening lung injury, ARDS is caused by a disruption in the hyaline membrane and
diffuse alveolar damage. This vascular disruption results in the leakage of plasma into alveolar
spaces and causes the extravasation of the capillaries that surround the alveoli of the lungs
other respiratory symptoms [9]. Additional risk factors for ARDS include infections, trauma,
pancreatitis, sepsis, fat embolism, amniotic fluid embolism, drug overdose, and inhaling toxic
substances [9].
(ARDS) in the alveoli.
Image reproduction approved by Health Save Blog
Credit: Health Save Blog
Unfortunately, the mortality rate is alarmingly high (globally, yet more than 6,759,210
infected, 395,331 death/ and 2,760,840/recovered) for individuals with coronavirus-induced
ARDS due to the complexity of the disease and its difficulty to treat [9]. A minuscule proportion
of patients with ARDS will succumb to it on account of respiratory failure alone. Acute
respiratory distress syndrome generally causes secondary complications such as sepsis or
multiorgan system failure. Although no specific treatments for this disease exist, physicians
should provide supportive care therapy to treat it appropriately [9]. Patients with COVID-19induced ARDS require precise and scrupulous care, which includes the meticulous use of
sedative and neuromuscular blocking agents, personalized hemodynamic management,
nutritional support, prophylactic measures for nosocomial infections, and deep venous
thrombosis prophylaxis and gastrointestinal hemorrhage [9]. As a rule, the first step in
managing COVID-19 patients with ARDS is providing proper airway management; patients are
first provided with non-invasive ventilation support, such as continuous positive airway
pressure (CPAP) or bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) to avoid the complications
associated with invasive methods of airway management, such as barotrauma, atelectrauma,
and volutrauma. Most patients are expected to require invasive forms of ventilation, such as
intubation and mechanical ventilation, to control their respiratory decline and failure. A prone
position and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation have recently been advocated as a form of
salvage therapy for refractory hypoxemic ARDS [9].
While managing patients with COVID-19 infection is an important component, it is critical to
use the appropriate diagnostic measures. The diagnosis of COVID-19 is confirmed with
a reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) diagnostic test, a nuclear-derived
method utilized to detect a specific genetic material from a specific pathogen. A sample is
collected from parts of the body where the coronavirus generally resides, most commonly the
nasopharynx [10]. Other diagnostic methods, including C-reactive protein (CRP) tests,
erythrocyte sedimentation rates, complete blood counts, comprehensive metabolic panels,
lactate dehydrogenase tests, D-dimer tests, serum albumin tests, creatinine tests, cardiac
enzyme tests, partial thrombin and partial thromboplastin time tests, liver function tests, chest
X-rays, and chest CT scans are used to not only identify the diagnosis but also predict the
progression of the disease and prognostic outcomes [11]. Lastly, many drugs have been used in
the treatment of COVID-19 infection including remdesivir, chloroquine, lopiavir, ritonavir,
favilavir, hydroxychloroquine, azithromycin, fingolimod and others but none of them has been
showing a drastic response. There are varying degrees of quarantine amongst countries [12].
As this case of a middle-aged male patient demonstrates, COVID-19 infection can cause
nonspecific gastrointestinal symptoms, life-threatening ARDS, and myopericarditis. The
diagnosis of COVID-19 was confirmed with the help of an RT-PCR. Additionally, abnormal
electrocardiography and echocardiography changes validated the diagnosis of myopericarditis.
Unlike other coronavirus infections that mainly cause pulmonary infections, this case of
coronavirus infection led to profound cardiac damage. Although no specific treatments are
currently available, strong evidence suggests that social distancing, quarantine, and isolation
produce a drastic reduction in viral transmission, as some of epidemiologic studies have
Additional Information
Human subjects: Consent was obtained by all participants in this study. Conflicts of interest:
that they have no financial relationships at present or within the previous three years with any
organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All
have influenced the submitted work.
Tyrrell DAJ, Myint SH: Coronaviruses. Medical Microbiology. 4th edition. Baron S (ed):
Weiss SR, Navas-Martin S: Coronavirus pathogenesis and the emerging pathogen severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev. 2005, 69:635-664.
Jiang S, Lu L, Liu Q, Xu W, Du L: Receptor-binding domains of spike proteins of emerging or
re-emerging viruses as targets for development of antiviral vaccines. Emerg Microbes Infect.
Hunt R: Corona viruses: colds, SARS, MERS and COVID-19 . Microbiology and Immunology.
Sever acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) . (2017). Accessed: May 20, 2017:
Middle East respiratory syndrome . (2012). Accessed: January 21, 2012:
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) . (2020). Accessed: March 27, 2020:
Coronavirus and COVID-19: what you should know . (2020). Accessed: March 20, 2020:
Diamond M, Peniston Feliciano HL, Sanghavi D, Mahapatra S: Acute Respiratory Distress
CDC diagnostic test for COVID-19 . (2020). Accessed: January 21, 2020:
Lippi G, Plebbani M: Laboratory abnormalities in patients with COVID-19 infection . Clin
Chem Lab Med. 2020, 10:10-15. 10.1515/cclm-2020-0198
COVID-19 prevention and investigational treatments . (2020). Accessed: March 26, 2020:
