Molecular  and  Serological  Tests  for COVID‐19.  Laboratory and
Point‐of‐Care  Diagnostics  Robert  Kubina  1,  *  and  Arkadiusz
Dziedzic  2  40‐055  Katowice,  Poland Department of Conservative
Dentistry  with  Endodontics,  Faculty  of  Medical  Sciences  in
Zabrze,  Abstract:  Validated and accurate laboratory testing for
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS‐CoV‐2) is a
crucial part of the timely management of Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID‐19)  disease,  supporting  the  clinical   decision‐making
process for infection control at the healthcare level and detect‐
ing asymptomatic cases.  This  would  facilitate  an  appropriate
treatment,  a  prompt  isolation and consequently deceleration of
the pandemic. Various laboratory tests can identify  the  genetic
material of SARS‐CoV‐2 that causes COVID‐19 in specimens, or spe‐
cific anti‐viral antibodies in blood/serum. Due  to  the  current
pandemic  situation,  a  development of point‐of‐care diagnostics
(POCD) allows us to substantially accelerate taking clinical  de‐
cisions  and implement compares the available POCD and those cur‐
rently under development, including  quantitative  reverse  tran‐
scription PCR (RT‐qPCR), serology immunoassays (SIAs) and protein
microarray method (PMM) designed for standard and rapid  COVID‐19
diagnosis.   Keywords:  COVID‐19; SARS‐CoV‐2; in vitro diagnostic
tests; RT‐qPCR; serology immunoassays  Coronavirus  Disease  2019
(COVID‐19), caused by the novel coronavirus Severe Acute Respira‐
tory  Syndrome  Coronavirus  2  (SARS‐CoV‐2,  formerly  known  as
2019‐nCoV), appeared in China for the first time, and subsequent‐
ly spread worldwide [1,2]. On 30 January 2020, the  World  Health
Organization (WHO) officially announced the COVID‐19 epidemics as
a threat to public health internationally, and  subsequently,  in
March  2020,  the  global  situation  escalated into the COVID‐19
427,000 deaths as of 13 June 2020 [3]. As a result of this rapid‐
ly progressing COVID‐19 pandemic and the limited laboratory‐based
molecular testing capacities, new point‐of‐care  (POC),  scalable
rapid diagnostic tests have been invented recently as easy‐to‐use
tools to allow COVID‐19 diagnostics outside  of  laboratory  set‐
tings.  What  is  more,  the  urgent need to multiply testing for
COVID‐19 has been clearly identified as an essential  element  of
the anti‐coronavirus strategy all over the world.  The diagnostic
sensitivity,  specificity  and  accuracy   concerning   suspected
COVID‐19  infection,  based on controlled testing and performance
data from clinical settings, is of substantial importance in  the
context  of  limiting the scope of coronavirus epidemics. Unreli‐
able and unproved tests may not detect patients with  active  in‐
fection or may incorrectly indicate COVID‐19‐negative patients as
positive, hampering healthcare efforts. The diagnostic laboratory
and  point‐of‐care  tests  (POCTs)  used in order to detect SARS‐
CoV‐2 are, first of all, reference tests based on molecular tech‐
nique  real‐time  quantitative  reverse  transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction assay (RT‐qPCR) as well as  serological  antibody‐
detecting and antigen‐detecting tests, for auxiliary purposes. At
present, only molecular quantitative  reverse  transcription  PCR
(RT‐qPCR) testing of respiratory tract samples is the recommended
method for the  identification  and  laboratory  confirmation  of
COVID‐19 cases, as these methods were evaluated for their quality
and safety through the World Health Organization (WHO)  protocols
[4,5].  On  the other hand, based on current scientific evidence,
WHO recommends the use of POC immunodiagnostic tests for research
purposes and, at present, they should not be utilized in a clini‐
cal decision‐making setting and in patient care until fully vali‐
dated,  with supporting data available. However, they can be use‐
ful in epidemiologic research or disease surveillance and further
evolve  as a critical step to develop COVID‐19 vaccine in future.
At the time of increased demand  for  hospital  services,  clini‐
cians, governments and health services urgently need a fast, sen‐
sitive, but at the same time inexpensive diagnostic test, in  or‐
der to rapidly manage patients, regarding admissions to hospitals
meant for COVID‐19 treatment. Therefore, the role of an  approved
and  reliable  diagnostic test in the COVID‐19 care pathway is of
the utmost importance.  As in the case of other  infectious  dis‐
eases,  the RT‐qPCR method, as well as serological tests, Genetic
assay based on the RT‐qPCR technique, performed in real time, es‐
pecially  plays  a  role  at the early stages of viral infection,
when the virus multiplies quickly, as this technique enables  di‐
rect detection of the pathogens genetic material. A different ap‐
proach in diagnosing  infection  is  represented  by  serological
methods,  based  on detectingin blood serumof antibodies that act
specifically against viral proteins, which are  produced  in  re‐
sponse  to  SARS‐CoV‐2.  Serological  IVD tests detect antibodies
which are responsible for neutralizing the virus; therefore, this
implies  that  they  are  used  when  the  immunological reaction
against SARS‐CoV‐2 virus is already taking place. These IVD  mea‐
sures can of subjects who already developed immunity. The results
of serological IVD tests should not be used as basis for diagnos‐
ing, ruling out infection with SARS‐CoV‐2, or informing about in‐
fection status [6].  The relatively quick discovery of the compo‐
sition  of  the  full  genome of SARS‐CoV‐2 early during the epi‐
demics made it easier to develop specific starters and normalized
laboratory  protocols for COVID‐19. The protocol of the first RT‐
qPCR test, focused on RNA‐dependent RNA polymerase end of January
2020.  Providing a brief description, the novel coronavirus SARS‐
CoV‐2 is equipped with a receptor‐binding domain (RBD), a  struc‐
ture  similar to the original SARS‐CoV that emerged for the first
time in 2002. Functionally important ORFs (1a and 1b)  and  other
main  structural proteins, including the spike (S), membrane (M),
envelope (E), and nucleocapsid (N) proteins, are also well inter‐
related and clearly annotated. According to previous reports, the
M and E proteins are essential for virus assembly,  while  the  S
protein  is crucial for affinity and attachment to host cells, as
the RBD of the S protein enables  binding  with  angiotensin‐con‐
verting  enzyme 2 (ACE2). The S protein on the structural protein
of SARS‐CoV‐2 is responsible for the transcription  and  replica‐
tion  of viral RNA, the packaging of the encapsulated genome into
virions, and interactions with the cell cycle of host cells.   In
addition,  coronaviruses  contain the N protein, which has a sub‐
stantial immunogenic ability and antigens  for  serodiagnosis  of
COVID‐19,  similarly to other diagnostic methods that were imple‐
mented for diagnosing SARS disease, based on  S/N  proteins  [7].
PCR COVID‐19 COVID‐19 genetic spike spike sequences of on [8]).on
[8]).  or nucleocapsid Validated COVID‐19 COVID‐19  Diagnosis  At
present, is going on worldwide which will At present, is going on
worldwide to to will simplify speed up tests, with further await‐
ing the completion of the and and Drug with further of the proce‐
dure Food and Administration (FDA) or In Vitro Diagnostics  (IVD)
certificate  to  be issued. It is worth noting that a (FDA) or In
Vitro Diagnostics (IVD) certificate to be  issued.  It  is  worth
noting  that  a large portion of large portion of available tests
are provided merely with the Research Use Only (RUO) certificate,
available  tests  are  provided merely with the Research Use Only
(RUO) certificate, which in fact does which in fact does not  im‐
ply anything concerning test quality or its validation. More rig‐
orous tests not imply test quality or with  its  validation.   to
products  to productsconcerning certified as IVD, the ISO13485 In
addition, as IVD, In addition, IVD they  to  local  to  local  CE
marking  in  Europe, and hence as CE of in Europe, and hence with
Directive the European and of of 27 October 1998 on in  vitro  of
medical  devices,  of clinical the European and of of evaluation,
1998 on in SARSwith an extensive evaluation, including the  vali‐
dation  of  clinical samples.  in the with COVID‐19 symptoms, by‐
ofdetecting genetic tests collected are meant for the and differ‐
entiation  in the material/specimens collected from patients with
COVID‐19 symptoms, by detecting specimens (sputum, tracheal aspi‐
rate  or  bronchoalveolar  lavage, swabs from nasopharynx and se‐
quences unique for SARS‐CoV‐2. The genetic material of the  virus
is  extracted from specimens pharynx, blood, urine, or stool) and
amplified by means of the PCR technique in real  time,  with  the
(sputum,  tracheal aspirate or bronchoalveolar lavage, swabs from
nasopharynx and pharynx,  blood,  use  of  reverse  transcription
(RT),  and  detected by means of fluorescent reporter probes spe‐
cific to or stool) and amplified by means of the PCR technique in
real time, with the use of reverse of fluorescent At present, RT‐
qPCR in the worldreporter market, which meant to  ORF1ab,  [8,9].
tests are in the worldThose to detect E, present, N, or S gene in
various and E, N, test protocol is complex and costly, for large,
or  S  gene  tests differ Tests usually h, yet the logistic time.
diagnostic The test protocol is complex and  costly,  for  large,
concerning  laboratories. Tests usually take 46 h, yet the logis‐
tic requirements concerning sending clinical  with  WHOtime  that
execution  is  24 h at the most [10].tests must enable the detec‐
tion of three genes in a single reaction: E  gene,  N  gene,  and
RdRP  gene.  This  allows us to detect viruses from the In accor‐
dance with WHO recommendations, RT‐qPCR tests must enable the de‐
tection  of  three beta‐coronavirus group (E gene), as well as to
identify SARS‐CoV‐2 virus (N gene and RdRP, ORF1ab).  in a  asin‐
gle  reaction:  E  gene, N gene, and RdRP gene. This allows us to
detect viruses from the design guarantees double confirmation  in
cases  of infection, it also limits the risk of obtaining as well
asonly to identify gene and false negativegroup in  case  of  de‐
tecting one targetSARS‐CoV‐2 for SARS‐CoV‐2.  Such of a design in
cases of infection, it also of obtaining doubtful results,  which
case  the of verification false negative in dedicated case of de‐
tecting only one to SARS‐CoV‐2 is presented in reduces of obtain‐
ing doubtful results, in which case the necessity of verification
occurs [11]. A comparison Name of the Kit ORF1ab RdRP Manual test
1copy  COVID‐19  qPCR  Kit  AB ANALITICA srl ADT Biotech LyteStar
2019‐nCoV RT‐PCR altona Diagnostics  RealStar  SARS‐CoV‐2  RT‐PCR
USA  EUA; CE‐IVD Atila Biosystems BIOMAXIMA S.A.  COVID Detection
SARS‐CoV‐2 Real Time PCR USA EUA USA EUA; CE‐IVD;  RUO  AccuPower
SARS‐CoV‐2 Real‐Time RT‐PCR BGI Health (HK) Real‐time fluorescent
RT‐PCR USA EUA; CE‐IVD; Canada CerTest Biotec, S.L VIASURE  SARS‐
CoV‐2  Real Time PCR Kit CerTest Biotec, S.L VIASURE SARS‐CoV‐2 S
gene Real Time PCR Kit Logix Smart Coronavirus CTK Biotech,  Inc.
Aridia COVID‐19 Real Time PCR Test DAAN Gene Co Detection Kit for
2019 Novel CE‐IVD; China Edinburgh  Genetics  COVID‐19  Real‐time
PCR Testing Kit CE‐IVD; China FDA Gencurix Inc.  GenePro COVID‐19
Detection Genomictree, Inc.  AccuraTect RT‐qPCR KH  Medical  RADI
COVID‐19  Detection  Kit Real‐Time PCR Kit SrongStep Novel Coron‐
avirus  PerkinElmer  Inc.   Realtime   RT‐PCR   CE‐IVD;   WHO‐EUL
Primerdesign  Ltd.   COVID‐19 genesig Real‐Time PCR assay CE‐IVD;
USA EUA;WHO R‐Biopharm AG RIDA GENE SARS‐CoV‐2 SD BIOSENSOR  Inc.
STANDARD  M  nCoV Real‐Time Detection Kit CE‐IVD; USA EUA; Brazil
TIB/Roche Diagn.  LightMix  Modular  SARS‐CoV‐2  TIB/Roche  Diagn
LightMix  Modular  SARS‐CoV‐2  TIB/Roche  Diagn  LightMix Modular
SARS‐CoV‐2 SD BIOSENSOR STANDARD M nCoV Real‐Time  Detection  kit
USA  EUA;  CE‐IVD;  Brazil Seegene, Inc.  Allplex 2019‐nCoV assay
USA EUA; CE‐IVD; Canada Sansure  Biotech  Inc  Novel  Coronavirus
(2019‐nCoV)  Nucleic  Acid  USA  EUA;  CE‐IVD; China Sente Biolab
COVID‐19 qRT PCR Detection Shanghai  ZJ  Liferiver  Novel  Coron‐
avirus  Multiplex  RT‐PCR CE‐IVD, China FDA Thermo Fisher TaqPath
COVID‐19 CE‐IVD RT‐PCR Kit Name of the Kit DMed 2019‐nCoV RT‐qPCR
Detection Kit US FDACE‐IVD Abbott Molecular Abbott RealTime SARS‐
CoV‐2 EUA test US FDACE‐IVD Xpert Xpress  SARS‐CoV‐2  US  FDA‐EUA
ORF1ab  RdRP  Automated  Lab‐based, near‐POC NAT or POC NAT Roche
Molecular US FDAWHO EUL Sente Biolab Senteligo COVID‐19  qRT  PCR
Detection  Kit Solgent Co.Ltd DiaPlexQ Novel Coronavirus Star Ar‐
ray Ptd. Ltd.  8‐min RT‐qPCR direct PCR VereCoV Detection Kit and
The  standard protocol with the application of the RT‐qPCR method
is demanding and time‐consuming. For that reason, scientists con‐
stantly strive to invent more up to date modifications of the RT‐
qPCR tests, which would cut down the time required  for  analyses
[13].   Bosch Healthcare Solutions announced that they had devel‐
oped a quick test, which may provide the results in 2.5 h; it  is
a  fast testing kit for the Vivalytic platform. It is a fully au‐
tomated PCR test, which is performed by simply inserting the swab
into  a cartridge, which is subsequently analyzed by the machine.
This universal platform  for  molecular  laboratory  diagnostics,
with the option for various samples testing and different analyt‐
ical methods, can be carried out as an  entirely  automated  mode
within  a  short  time. Unfortunately, the equipment has not been
available for many healthcare institutions yet, and the  diagnos‐
tic cartridges are dedicated solely to the specific analyzing de‐
vice [14].  BioMaxima has invented a test whose  main  advantages
include  a  short  waiting time; the results can be obtained in a
mere 2 h. Moreover, the analytical sensitivity of the test, being
at  the  level  of  10 RNA copies per reaction, is higher than in
other comparable systems. It seems important that  the  molecular
test kit contains reagents with substantially enhanced stability,
which allows us to transport it safely and store it at room  tem‐
perature,  whereas  many other tests available on the market need
to be stored in a freezer and to be transported in dry ice. Stor‐
ing  such reagents, even for a short time, in conditions that de‐
viate from those indicated is risky and may result in  generating
false  negative  test  results [15].  sensitive than the previous
ones and it implies the possibility of examining patients at ear‐
lier  stages,  reacting  more quickly, and effectively preventing
the spread of coronavirus. This new  test  for  diagnosing  SARS‐
CoV‐2  provides  rapid results within 30 min, whereas the fastest
current methods that concentrate on viral RNA give results in 1.5
to  2  h,  i.e.,  three  times faster than the presently quickest
testing methods, and which requires the application of relatively
simple technical devices. Apart from those advantages, the scien‐
tists responsible for the tests development  claim  that  it  may
even  help  detect  patients infected with coronavirus at earlier
stages, in comparison with current methods, while its results can
be  read  with the naked eye, which makes it more available for a
wider spectrum of healthcare units and  specialists.  This  fast‐
molecular  test  has been recently registered by the FDA and uti‐
lizes a diagnostic system, which,  in  recent  years,  proved  to
function  perfectly  in diagnosing multiple infections (including
Hepatitis C VirusHCV and influenza) [16]. RNA  detection  may  be
performed by means of RT‐qPCR or reverse transcriptionloop ampli‐
fication (RTLAMP). A standard RT‐qPCR test takes 90 to 120 min on
average  to  test a set of samples, whereas LAMP may be completed
in 30 min. Indirect isothermal amplification  (LAMP)  is  a  fast
technology  of  DNA amplification, which is applied in the detec‐
tion of pathogens such as viruses or bacteria. LAMP reaction usu‐
ally  takes place at constant temperature, and the target DNA may
be amplified in 30 min. LAMP method utilizes four or six starters
for  binding six regions of target DNA, its specificity is excep‐
tionally high. Because SARS‐CoV‐2 is  a  RNA‐type  virus  with  a
length  of  some 30 kb, a single reverse transcriptase (RT) reac‐
tion and LAMP may, jointly, significantly  shorten  the  reaction
time,  omitting  the  stage  of purifying cDNA from reverse tran‐
scriptase, and thanks to this, SARS‐CoV‐2 may be quickly  detect‐
ed.  It has to be noted that similarly, a one‐step RT‐qPCR method
does not require cDNA purification (a single six starters in each
set/kit)  focused  on  viral  RNA of SARS‐CoV‐2 in the regions of
ORF1ab, S gene, and N gene. For the interpretation of results,  a
colorimetric  method  has been applied, which enables the reading
of the results of viral RNA amplification by the naked eye, with‐
out  the  necessity  of  using expensive equipment. Moreover, the
sensitivity of the method may be 80 copies of viral RNA per 1  mL
in  the sample and single stage process (without separate RNA ex‐
traction), which enables the amplification of RNA  directly  from
the sample [17,18].  Performing examinations with the use of fast
molecular tests may be particularly useful in  Emergency  Depart‐
ments  and  admission  rooms.  POCTs  are  needed to speed up the
process of taking clinical decisions and  decrease  the  workload
for  centralized  testing laboratories [16]. POCT means that test
results are instantly delivered in  the  patient  care  settings,
such  as  hospitals, urgent care centers and emergency rooms, in‐
stead of the use of expensive and time‐consuming laboratory  pro‐
cesses.   Additionally,  the American company Cepheid developed a
quick test which, as they declare, takes 45 min, while the  Dutch
pharmacists  owning  Qiagen developed a 1‐h test. The US Food and
Drug diagnostics, Xpert Xpress SARS‐CoV‐2, according to a  state‐
ment  from the agency. The test was designed to provide detection
of novel coronavirus within a short period of 45 min, using spec‐
imens  from  a  nasopharyngeal swab, nasal wash/aspirate. Another
POCT, the Xpert Xpress SARS‐CoV‐2 test cartridge is dedicated  to
detecting  SARS‐CoV‐2 nucleic acid utilizing RT‐qPCR and does not
require the use of reagents. In the contrary, the GeneXpert  Sys‐
tem needs the test to be run in a CLIA‐approved laboratory (Clin‐
ical Laboratory Improvement Amendments) or in a selection of  pa‐
tient  care settings [19].  It is equally important to understand
that RT‐qPCR tests have also certain limitations.  They  are  the
most  useful in case of positive results, although they appear to
have less diagnostic value in situations when  COVID‐19  must  be
ruled out. Negative RT‐qPCR test results do not necessarily indi‐
cate that person has not contracted  an  infectious  disease,  as
other  individual factors also need to be considered, such as ex‐
posure risk and potential laboratory errors. The  false  negative
results  may occur if the sample has not been properly collected,
transported, or handled/treated, or as a result of  the  improper
extraction of nucleic acid from clinical materials [9]. Moreover,
the false positive results can be related to the situation  where
the  sample  contains inhibitors of amplification, or an insuffi‐
cient amount of virus molecules. On the contrary, a  false  posi‐
tive  result  may be due to the cross‐contamination of the sample
during its handling or preparation, or between  patient  samples.
What is more, the influence of vaccines, antiviral drugs, antibi‐
otics, chemotherapeutic agents, or  immunosuppressive  drugs  has
not been taken into consideration. Moreover, the set/kit does not
exclude diseases caused by other bacterial  or  viral  pathogens.
The  negative  results do not exclude infection and should not be
the sole basis for patients treatment. Test  results  when  using
the  kit  serve  clinical  purposes  only. Clinical diagnosis and
treatment of patients should be considered  in  conjunction  with
the  manifestations  and  symptoms,  medical history, response to
treatment or other laboratory tests [9]. In general,  the  sensi‐
tivity  of  this  molecular method may vary depending on specimen
collection  (broncho‐alveolar  lavage,  sputum,  nasal  swabs  or
throat  swabs) and, what is more, the accuracy depends upon stage
of infection, the rate of SARS‐CoV‐2 multiplication, and also the
degree  of  clearance.  Interestingly, the provided values of RT‐
qPCR accuracies seem to be higher for in vitro validation by uti‐
lizing  SARS‐CoV‐2‐dedicated  primers and cultures in highly con‐
trolled laboratory settings [20].  It is assumed that the optimal
outcome  and clear‐cut diagnostic gold standard might depend upon
the development of hybrid assays in order to minimize  the  frac‐
tion  of  false negative results.  The enhanced RT‐qPCR test com‐
bined with serological immunoassays (either antibody‐detecting or
antigen‐detecting),  would  bring  an additional diagnostic value
for accurate and quick COVID‐19 diagnosis in  vitro  diagnostics,
when  the  human body reacts to an infectious bio‐stimulant [21].
Evaluation of Molecular RT‐qPCR Tests that Detect the RNA Nucleic
Acid of SARS‐CoV‐2 The progress made in recent years in the diag‐
nostics of infections enables the application,  often  simultane‐
ously, of numerous methods in order to detect respiratory viruses
effectively. The choice patient population to be tested, as  well
as  the  technical  abilities and experience of the testing unit.
The validation of RT‐qPCR tests seems to be an important step  in
combating  the  new coronavirus.  One of the most significant pa‐
rameters regarding the efficiency of the diagnostic procedure  is
most  probably  the one related to the minimum amount of analyte,
which may be detected and quantitatively determine by means of  a
particular  test.  The parameters describing those properties are
known as limit of detection (LoD)  and  limit  of  quantification
(LoQ).  In  many  laboratories,  LoD is used interchangeably with
sensitivity, analytical  sensitivity,  or/and  detection  limit..
This may be misleading, though, as sensitivity is also understood
and used in other ways.  Sensitivity  and  clinical  (diagnostic)
specificity  are two different parameters. Diagnostic sensitivity
is the proportion of true positive results to  the  sum  of  true
positive  and  true negative results. A sensitivity ratio of 100%
implies that all the sick people have been identified. The speci‐
ficity  of  a  test is the proportion of true negative results to
the sum of true negative and false positive ones. The specificity
of 100% implies that all healthy people in a given test have been
correctly identified as healthy/not having the condition.   still
one  can notice differences in analytical sensitivity of the test
(LOD). The vast majority of molecular tests kits  contain  a  so‐
called  internal positive control (IPC), that can be utilized ei‐
ther as an extraction control or internal control. The IPC is es‐
sential  for  an evaluation of whether the genetical material ex‐
traction procedure and amplification stage were carried out  cor‐
rectly.  The  failure  in IPC detection using a patients specimen
may indicate the improper extraction of nucleic acid from  clini‐
cal  material as a consequence of nucleic acid loss or the trans‐
position of PCR inhibitors and the lack of sufficient  biological
material  in the collected sample. It needs to be noted that many
molecular tests may not here that detect the  RNA  of  SARS‐CoV‐2
contain IPC.  Another important factor which describes a diagnos‐
tic test is the analytical specificity. It is the  ability  of  a
test  to  detect a specific target, e.g., a virus. It is of great
importance to check whether the starters used  in  PCR  test  are
specific to a given virus. There are two components of analytical
sensitivity: cross‐reactivity and interference.  Cross‐reactivity
may occur if, in a sample collected from a patient, there are or‐
ganisms which are genetically related that imitate the virus ana‐
lysed,  from  the perspective of cross‐reactivity; unfortunately,
that analysis is selective and does not concern the  same  micro‐
organisms.   Name  of the Kit Limit of Detection LOD altona Diag‐
nostics RealStar SARS‐CoV‐2 RT‐PCR Atila BioSystems  Inc.   Atila
iAMP COVID‐19 Detection BGI Health (HK) Co. Ltd.  Real‐time Fluo‐
rescent RT‐PCR kit for ARGENE SARS‐COV‐2 R‐GENE SARS‐CoV‐2  Real‐
Time  RT‐PCR  Kit Boditech Med. Inc.  ExAmplar COVID‐19 real‐time
PCR kit (L) CerTest Biotec VIASURE SARS‐CoV‐2 Real Time  PCR  De‐
tection  Kit Detection Kit for 2019 Novel Coronavirus (2019‐nCoV)
RNA EURORealTime SARS‐CoV‐2 DAAN Gene Co.  Ltd.   GeneFirst  Ltd.
KH  Medical  Co.  Ltd.   Primerdesign Ltd.  The Novel Coronavirus
(2019‐nCoV) Nucleic Acid Test Kit  RADI  COVID‐19  Detection  Kit
Coronavirus  COVID‐19  Real‐Time PCR assay GENE SARS‐CoV‐2 RUO SD
Biosensor Inc.  STANDARD M nCoV Real‐Time Detection  Kit  Seegene
Inc.   Allplex  2019‐nCoV  Assay R‐Biopharm AG Shanghai Kehua KHB
Diagnostic kit for SARS‐CoV‐2 Nucleic Acid  (Real‐time  PCR)  Tib
Molbiol  ModularDx  Kit SARS‐CoV (COVID19) E‐gene (Tib Molbiol) +
LightCycler Multiplex RNA Virus Vela  Diagnostics  ViroKey  SARS‐
CoV‐2  RT‐PCR  Test  Name  of  Test Human coronavirus NL 63 Human
coronavirus OC229E Human coronavirus OC43 Human coronavirus  HKU1
Human Metapneumovirus Parainfluenza virus 1 Parainfluenza virus 2
Parainfluenza virus 3 Parainfluenza virus 4 Influenza A virus In‐
fluenza  B  Virus  Enterovirus (e.g., EV68) Respiratory syncytial
virus  A  Respiratory  syncytial  virus  B  Chlamydia  pneumoniae
Hemophilus influenzae Legionella pneumophila Mycobacterium tuber‐
culosis Streptococcus pneumoniae Streptococcus pyogenes Bordetel‐
la  parapertussis  Bordetella bronchiseptica Bordetella pertussis
Mycoplasma pneumoniae Pneumocystis jirovecii (PJP) Candida  albi‐
cans Pseudomonas aeruginosa Staphylococcus epidermis Staphylococ‐
cus salivarius Staphylococcus aureus Human immunodeficiency virus
type  1,2  Hepatitis virus (A, B, C) Logix Smart PCR Testing qPCR
Kit RT‐PCR Kit Biotec, S.L SD BIOSENSOR Bio‐Products  PerkinElmer
SARS‐CoV‐2  STANDARD  M  Detection Kit Inc. Allplex Combo Kit EUA
test Xpert Xpress No data available (nd);  does  not  cross‐react
with  analyzed  pathogen  (‐).  3. Emerged Rapid Immunodiagnostic
(Serology Immunoassays) Tests Immunological methods are, most of‐
ten,  the chemiluminescent assaying of immunoglobulin IgG and IgM
for SARS‐CoV‐2 from blood on an analyzer, or immunochromatograph‐
ic assessment in the form of rapid POCTs, not requiring addition‐
al equipment. The methods of detecting  anti‐SARS‐CoV‐2  antibod‐
ies, despite the ongoing research to develop them further, may or
even should be applied during the coronavirus epidemics  [22,23].
After  about  a  week from the first clinical manifestations, the
sensitivity of molecular diagnostics (PCR)  diminishes  gradually
for  SARS‐CoV‐2  infections,  due to have false negative results,
despite the ongoing infection.   3.1.  Lateral  Flow  Immunoassay
Among  the  many contemporary technologies available, special at‐
tention should be paid to rapid lateral flow immunoassay  (LFIA),
also referred to as immunochromatographic tests. Perhaps they are
not so much appreciated in the scientific community as PCR  meth‐
ods  or  Enzyme‐Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA tests), despite
the fact that they do find application in  diagnostics  more  and
more  often.  They differ, depending on the type of test, but the
basic principle of their action is invariably the  samethey  make
use  of  the unique property that antibodies possess, that of un‐
complicated and relatively inexpensive tool meant  for  detecting
the  presence  (or  absence) of a given component in the examined
specimen, such as the presence of a virus in  an  analyzed  blood
sample.   Examination with the use of those tests is possible for
various types of test materialwhole human  blood,  blood  plasma,
serum,  stool,  urine,  sweat, cerebrospinal fluid, or even tears
[9]. The test principle is based on an immunological method,  us‐
ing  specific  antibodies,  most  often in complex with colloidal
gold, where a drop of the examined substance  first  moves  along
the  nitrocellulose membrane using capillary phenomena. After the
sample is absorbed by the membrane, the antigen (should the  test
prove to be positive) binds to the colloidal gold complex and re‐
spective antibodies. Consequently, the effect of that reaction is
the  formation  of a complex, which will be detected by the test.
The interpretation of results consists of confirmation or  ruling
out  of the presence of antigens in the examined sample, based on
color test strips that appear in the test [21,22]. The brief com‐
parison  of  advantages  and  Short reaction time for most tests,
amounting to 520 min Suboptimal sensitivity, results often  false
negative, particularly during enhanced activity of the virus per‐
formed in outpatient clinics or at patients  bed.   Despite  sub‐
stantial  specificity  sometimes  the results are false negative,
particularly when the virus is not much active.  Reading most of‐
ten  possible with naked eye.  It is necessary to verify positive
or doubtful results.  Small amount of material to  be  collected,
variety of material.  Increased risk of operator becoming infect‐
ed best before date distant (usually 18 months from manufacturing
date)  At present, most immunoenzymatic tests available are based
on the immunochromatic technique.  The difference  between  those
tests depends upon the molecule assayed (p/c or antigens), struc‐
ture, performance time, and diagnostic material. It may  be  sup‐
posed that, in future, rapid tests will enable easier and quicker
diagnostics of many diseases, without the necessity of performing
tedious and complicated procedures. This would reduce the waiting
time for obtaining results, and accelerate  3.2.  Immunoenzymatic
and  Immunofluorimetric  Assays  The  detection of specific SARS‐
CoV‐2 serum antibodies allows for a  rapid,  cost‐effective,  and
reasonably  sensitive  clinical  diagnosis  of  COVID‐19,  as im‐
munoglobulins such as IgM provide the  initial  humoral  response
during  the first stage of viral infection, prior to the onset of
the adaptive, high‐affinity IgG response essential for  long‐term
immunological  memory.  Research indicates that after SARS infec‐
tion, antibodies of the IgM class may  be  detected  in  patients
blood  about 6 days after the infection, while IgG may be already
detected after 8 days. As SARS‐CoV‐2 belongs to  the  same  large
family  of viruses, which includes those causing Middle East Res‐
piratory Syndrome (MERS) and Severe  Acute  Respiratory  Syndrome
(SARS),  it should be assumed that the process of producing anti‐
bodies will be similar to that in case of other viruses belonging
to that family, while the detection of IgG antibodies and IgM an‐
tibodies acting against SARS‐CoV‐2 may be an indication of infec‐
tion. Moreover, the detection of IgM antibodies usually indicates
a recent exposure to SARS‐CoV‐2, whereas the detection of IgG an‐
tibodies in case of COVID‐19 indicates exposure to the virus some
time ago [30].  Serological tests, detecting solely the IgM class
of  antibodies, should find applications for diagnostic purposes.
When using tests which detect both IgM and  IgG  antibodies,  one
should  remember  that  a  from  serological tests do not exclude
SARS‐CoV‐2 infection, as the window period (delay in the  produc‐
tion of antibodies) may exceed 7 days. Serological tests may also
give false positive results.  This may be the case of past or on‐
going infection with virus strains other than SARS‐CoV‐2, such as
coronavirus HKU1, NL63, OC43, or 229E. Moreover, the first  tests
assessing  the  titer of IgA class antibodies have been launched,
which, from the perspective of immunology, is of  extreme  impor‐
tance,  as  it provides the possibility of testing for antibodies
in a material other than blood samples collected  from  patients,
e.g., respiratory tract secretions.  Type of Test Phase of Infec‐
tion The window period for a test designed to detect  a  specific
disease  Early  stage of infection Active phase of infection Late
or recurrent stage of infection Early stage of infection. PCR re‐
sult  may  be false negative * Past infection (recover) * The re‐
covery stage of infection, or PCR result may be false negative  *
No infection and no special symptoms P(+)positive; N()negative. *
Human coronaviruses (HCoV) OC43, 229E, NL63, and HKU1  may  cause
false positive ELISA results.  Serological tests are thus applied
as an adjunctive method, for monitoring the epidemiological situ‐
ation,  yet they may be performed faster and are less costly than
genetic tests. This diagnostic method has a limited  sensitivity,
yet  efforts to improve it are ongoing, as it is useful for moni‐
toring the infection. Due to insufficient data concerning,  among
others,  the  dynamics of immunological response to infection and
the diagnostic value of available tests for detecting IgM and IgG
class  antibodies  (comprising sensitivity, specificity, positive
and negative predictive value), in  many  countries,  it  is  im‐
munochromatographic  tests  for  SARS‐CoV‐2 based on sensitivity,
specificity, sample type and test performance time.   Diagnostics
2020, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW of the selected immunochromatographic
tests for SARS‐CoV‐2 based on  sensitivity,  specificity,  sample
type  and  test  performance time.  manufacturers specification).
IgG/IgM Rapid Test Cassette COVID‐19 IgMIgG Rapid Test RAPID TEST
Tianjin Beroni IgG/IgM Antibody Detection Kit Test name of Coron‐
avirus Disease 2019 (COVID‐19) serological  tests,  including  to
manufacturers Clinical Specificity Clinical Sensitivity Test Name
Clinical Specificity Clinical Sensitivity IgM Sensitivity  Clini‐
cal Specificity IgM Clinical Sensitivity IgG Specificity Clinical
Specificity IgG Clinical Sensitivity Positive Clinical Specifici‐
tyValue at prevalence = Positive Predictive at or IgG) or IgG) at
prevalence Negative Predictive or IgG) or IgG) IgG/IgM Rapid Test
Cassette  IgM‐IgG  Rapid Test kit Tianjin Beroni IgG/IgM Antibody
Detection Kit In serological IVD, the so‐called window period  is
of  much importancethat is, the time when specific antibodies are
notimmunochromatographic In the phase of  an  based  of  selected
production  of  antibodies is initiated, but their level is still
low, and thus test results may prove  negative.   Anti‐SARS‐CoV‐2
antibodies  appear  quite  late,  i.e., a few days after clinical
manifestations, which is serological tests cannot be  used  as  a
basic tool in diagnosing SARS‐CoV‐2 infections [32].  of selected
immunochromatographic tests for SARS‐CoV‐2 based onSample  speci‐
ficity,  Accu‐Tell  sample  type 10 L of whole blood, AccuBioTech
Co. Ltd.  to manufacturers serum or plasma Test Cassette  AllTest
Biotech Hangzhou AccuBioTech Co.Rapid Test Cassette IgG/IgM Rapid
Test Rapid Test Aytu Bioscience Rapid Tes COVID‐19 IgM‐IgG BioMe‐
domics,  Inc  Dual Antibody BIOMAXIMA S.A.  Rapid Test Rapid Test
Cassette Cellex Inc.  Changsha Sinocare Inc.  IgG / IgM Test Cas‐
sette  Aytu  BioscienceAllTest  Biotech  BIOMAXIMA  S.A.   Cellex
qSARS‐CoV‐2 IgG/IgM Cassette Rapid Test SARS‐CoV‐2 Antibody  Test
Strip  95.0% Whole blood (Colloidal Gold Method) Sample size 10 L
of serum or plasma IgM 96% 10 L of whole of fingertip serum or or
whole  blood 10 L of serum orof serum plasma or plasma L of whole
blood blood or whole blood 1020 L whole blood, 5 L  of  serum  or
serum  or plasma 10 L of whole blood 1020 L whole blood, serum or
plasma blood, serum or IgG IgM 10 L whole blood, serum or  plasma
99.2%  Whole  blood  10  L  of  whole  blood, serum or plasma CTK
Biotech OnSite COVID‐19 IgG/IgM Rapid Tes  1015  L  of  serum  or
plasma  Edinburgh Genetics Limited Watmind 2019 nCoV novel coron‐
avirus detection reagent 10 L of serum or plasma; 20 L of finger‐
tip  blood or whole blood Getein Biotech, Inc.  One Step Test for
Novel Coronavirus IgM/IgG Antibody 10 L of serum or plasma; 20  L
of  fingertip  blood  or  whole  blood  Goldsite Diagnostics Inc.
SARS‐CoV‐2 IgG/IgM 30 L of whole blood Hangzhou  Biotest  Biotech
COVID‐19  IgG/IgM  Rapid Test Cassette 10 L of whole blood, serum
or plasma Hunan Lituo Biotechnology  COVID‐19  IgG/IgM  Detection
Kit  InTec  Products, Inc.  Rapid SARS‐CoV‐2 Antibody Test IgG or
Ig Mor IgG/IgM 10 L  of  sample  Liming  Bio‐Products  Co.,  Ltd.
COVID‐19 IgG/IgM Combo Rapid Test Device 10 L of serum or plasma;
20 L of whole blood Sample Size Livzon Diagnostic Diagnostic  Kit
for  IgM/IgG  Antibody  to 10 L of serum or plasma; 20 L of whole
blood nal von minden GmbH NADAL COVID‐19 IgG/IgM  Test  10  L  of
whole blood, serum or plasma Nanjing Vazyme Medical Tech.  Detec‐
tion Kit 20 L of whole blood, serum  or  plasma  PRIMA  Lab  S.A.
PRIMA  COVID‐19 IgG/IgM Rapid Test (For Professional Use) 10 L of
serum or plasma; 20 L of fingertip blood or  whole  blood  Sugen‐
tech,  Inc  SGTi‐flex  COVID‐19  10  L  whole blood Sensing Self,
COVID‐19 Rapid IgG/IgM combined Antibody assay IgM 92%  IgG  100%
20 L of fingertip blood or whole blood Xiamen AmonMed Biotechnol‐
ogy COVID‐19 IgM/IgG test kit Coris BioConcept COVID‐19 Ag  Rapi‐
GEN,  Inc.  COVID‐19 Ag SD BIOSENSOR, STANDARD Q COVID‐19 Ag Test
VivaChek Laboratories, COVID‐19 IgM/IgG Rapid Test IgM  and  IgG:
97.1%  10  L  of  whole  blood,  serum  or plasma Qingdao Hightop
Biotech SARS‐CoV‐2 IgM/IgG Antibody Rapid Test 10 L of  serum  or
20  L  of  whole  blood  Wuhan Coronavirus Rapid Test (2019‐nCoV,
COVID‐19) IgG/IgM 5 L of serum or 10 L of whole blood In serolog‐
ical  IVD,  the so‐called window period is of much importancethat
is, the time when the production of antibodies is initiated,  but
their  level  is still low, and thus test results may prove nega‐
tive. Anti‐SARS‐CoV‐2 antibodies appear quite late, i.e.,  a  few
days  after  clinical  manifestations,  which  is why serological
tests cannot be used as a basic tool in diagnosing SARS‐CoV‐2 in‐
fections  [32].   The detection of specific anti‐SARS‐CoV‐2 anti‐
bodies is possible about 10 days after the first  clinical  mani‐
festations  of  infection.  Thus, this serves the purpose of con‐
firming contact with coronavirus, and is of  enormous  importance
from  an  epidemiological  perspective, as it allows us to detect
subjects  who  had  the  infection  but  were   asymptomatic   or
oligosymptomatic, and could have been the source of infection for
other people (silent carriers/vectors). It also allows us to  de‐
termine  the spread Test Type Proteome Microarray AccuBioTech Co.
Ltd.  Accu‐Tell COVID‐19 IgG/IgM Rapid  Test  Cassette  BIOMAXIMA
S.A.   2019‐nCoV  IgG/IgM  Rapid  Test  Cassette BioMedomics, Inc
COVID‐19 IgM‐IgG Dual Antibody Rapid Test  CE‐IVD;  India  Cellex
Inc.  Cellex qSARS‐CoV‐2 IgG/IgM Cassette Rapid Test CE‐IVD; USA;
Australia; Brazil Changsha  Sinocare  Inc.   SARS‐CoV‐2  Antibody
Test  Strip  (Colloidal  Gold  Method) Edinburgh Genetics Limited
Watmind 2019 nCoV novel coronavirus  antibody  detection  reagent
Getein  Biotech,  Inc.   One  Step  Test  for  Novel  Coronavirus
(2019‐nCoV) IgM/IgG Antibody  Goldsite  Diagnostics  Inc.   SARS‐
CoV‐2  IgG/IgM Kit Hunan Lituo Biotechnology COVID‐19 IgG/IgM De‐
tection Kit Innovita  Biological  Technology  2019‐nCoV  Ab  Test
(Colloidal Gold) IgM/IgG CE‐IVD; China, Brazil IgG or IgM or both
Whole blood/serum/plasma InTec Products, Inc.   Rapid  SARS‐CoV‐2
Antibody Test IgG or Ig Mor IgG/IgM Liming Bio‐Products Co., Ltd.
COVID‐19 IgG/IgM Combo Rapid Test  Device  nal  von  minden  GmbH
NADAL  COVID‐19  IgG/IgM  Test  PRIMA  Lab  S.A.   PRIMA COVID‐19
IgG/IgM Rapid Test (For Professional Use) Dynamiker Biotechnology
(Tianjin)  Co.,  Ltd.  2019 nCOV IgG/IgM Rapid Test Coris BioCon‐
cept COVID‐19 Ag Respi‐Strip RapiGEN, Inc.  BIOCREDIT COVID‐19 Ag
SD  BIOSENSOR, Inc.  STANDARD Q COVID‐19 Ag Test DRG Internation‐
al, Inc.  COVID‐19 lgG, EIA‐6146 Epitope Diagnostics,  Inc.   EDI
Novel  Coronavirus COVID‐19 IgG ELISA Kit EUROIMMUN AG Anti‐SARS‐
CoV‐2 ELISA (IgG) DRG International, Inc.  COVID‐19 lgM, EIA‐6147
Epitope  Diagnostics,  Inc.   EDI  Novel Coronavirus COVID‐19 IgM
ELISA Kit EUROIMMUN AG Anti‐SARS‐CoV‐2 ELISA (IgA) SD  BIOSENSOR,
Inc.   STANDARD  F COVID‐19 Ag FIA Shenzhen Bioeasy Biotechnology
Co., Ltd.  Bioeasy 2019‐nCoV Ag Fluorescence Rapid Test Kit Moko‐
bio  Biotechnology R&D Center PEPperPRINT GmbH CE‐IVD, Brasil CE‐
IVD; Brazil; USA CE‐IVD;  Brazil  CE‐IVD,  Brasil  Nasopharyngeal
swab  SARS‐CoV‐2 IgM & IgG Quantum Dot Immunoassay serum, plasma,
whole blood PEPperCHIP SARS‐CoV‐2  Proteome  Microarray  (manual)
3.3.  Protein  Microarray  Method  (PMM)  The  protein microarray
method (PMM) is a proteomic screening technique serving the  pur‐
pose of simultaneous/parallel quantitative and qualitative analy‐
sis of mixtures containing many proteins.  The chip used is  com‐
posed of a supporting surface (e.g., modified glass plate, nitro‐
cellulose membrane, or microtitration plate), on which the matrix
of  capturing  proteins is immobilized in accordance with the de‐
termined formula, performing the function of a probe. The materi‐
al  captured may be antibodies, enzymes, or ligands. Protein ana‐
lyte, added to the matrix, may be modified by  means  of  various
types  of markers (among others: radioisotopes, fluorescence, lu‐
minescence markers). The interaction equipment. The advantages of
protein  micromatrices include the short time required for analy‐
sis, modest consumption of samples and reagents, high  sensitivi‐
ty, automation of testing. They allow us to investigate the func‐
tions and effects of proteins on large scale [33,34].  The  newly
developed PEPperCHIP SARS‐CoV‐2 Proteome Microarray (PEPperPRINT)
based on the SARS‐CoV‐2 genome derived  from  the  virus  isolate
Wuhan‐Hu‐1  (GenBank  ID: MN908947.3) enables us to serologically
screen about 5000 individual peptides spanning  the  whole  viral
proteome.  Sequences  of  ORF1ab  protein,  surface glycoprotein,
ORF3a protein, coat protein, membrane glycoprotein, ORF6 protein,
ORF7a  protein,  ORF8  protein,  nucleocapsid phosphoprotein, and
ORF10 protein have been elongated and connected by means of  neu‐
tral  GSGSGSG  connectors.   The elongated protein sequences have
been transcribed into 4883  different  peptides  composed  of  15
amino  acids  printed  in two repetitions (9766 peptide sites) in
order to obtain high‐resolution epitope  data.  In  the  case  of
SARS‐CoV, which emerged in 2002, it was demonstrated that the ap‐
plication of PMM is characterized  by  enhanced  sensitivity,  as
more Chinese subjects were diagnosed as SARS‐positive when apply‐
ing PMM in comparison with ELISA tests. The PMM seems to be  more
reliable,  as  it allows us to determine more protein antigens of
the virus [35]. An additional advantage of such tests is the pos‐
sibility  of  automating  the entire analytical process. Unfortu‐
nately, the method has several imperfections, including  the  re‐
peatability of the test itself, while the cost of the testing and
equipment used for micromatrix diagnostics is significant,  which
makes  the PMM method less accessible in standard laboratory set‐
tings [36].  Undoubtedly, the scalable and reliable POCTs used in
the community and outside laboratories would have the opportunity
to reduce the time to  obtain  COVID‐19  diagnostic  results  and
might support early implementation of isolation resources and in‐
fection control measures. From a medical workforce point of view,
antibody‐  and  antigen‐detecting tests appear to have a signifi‐
cant role in identifying healthcare workers  who  recovered  from
SARS‐CoV‐2  infection,  to  assess  their  suitability to provide
frontline health services. On the other hand, the false  negative
serology  tests could cause spread of COVID‐19, unjustified reas‐
surance and a change in public behavior. Undoubtedly,  the  nega‐
tive  results  of serology tests (swabs) should not be treated as
definitive for ruling out, but a positive test results are  bene‐
ficial  to rule in coronavirus infection. The sufficient accuracy
of serology tests used more widely will allow us to make  an  ap‐
propriate  decision  regarding lifting restrictions on a national
level. Nevertheless, the wider implementation of POCD will  ulti‐
mately support public health strategies about the potential lift‐
ing of social distancing restrictions in future  [30].  Moreover,
with  the limited data available at present, for antibody‐detect‐
ing and antigen‐detecting rapid POCD,  further  intense  research
into  their potential diagnostic utility is highly encouraged. If
these tests demonstrate adequate accuracy, it is likely that they
could  potentially  be used as triage tests for quick identifica‐
tion of patients who are suspected of contracting  COVID‐19,  re‐
ducing  the  need  for  expensive reference molecular PCR testing
[4,6]. Finally, it is worth noting the psychological  and  behav‐
ioral  consequences  of  correctly established and known immunity
status within the community.  4. The  Currently  Developing  Con‐
cepts  of  COVID‐19  Diagnostics  4.1. Clustered Regularly Inter‐
spaced Short Palindromic Repeats  (CRISPR/Cas13)  Technology  Re‐
cently,  a  test  has been developed based on Clustered Regularly
Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR/Cas12a), with  vis‐
ual  readouts. The test can detect 10 copies of the virus gene in
merely 45 min, providing simple and reliable  diagnostic  method,
which additionally demonstrates high sensitivity and specificity.
In order to enable fast diagnosis at the hospital  or  on  admis‐
sion,  the  test be split off by the Cas12a protein, when the nu‐
cleic acid of SARS‐CoV‐2 is found in the  detection  system.   In
this  way, a green signal of fluorescence will be obtained, visi‐
ble with the naked eye, inthe light, with a wavelength of 485 nm.
The high specificity of the test was obtained by designing 15 cr‐
RNAs, which may distinguish the polymorphisms of a single nucleo‐
tide with other viruses related to SARS in four domains: ORF1a or
ORF1b, N, and E genes [37].  4.2. Exhaled Breath Condensate (EBC)
The search for new diagnostic methods is continued. Because SARS‐
CoV‐2 is spread by droplets, while the diagnostic sensitivity and
specificity  index  for RT‐qPCR tests is the highest for broncho‐
alveolar lavage (BAL) (higher  than  for  sputum  or  nose/throat
swabs),  scientists  recently  proposed the use of exhaled breath
condensate (EBC) for diagnostic purposes. EBC is most similar  in
its  biochemical composition and origin to BAL. Examinations with
the use of EBC are a relatively  novel  diagnostic  method,  used
mainly  to  assess inflammation within the respiratory tract, and
its components reflect the composition of the  fluid  lining  the
bronchi and alveoli. EBC is a condensed form of small droplets of
the fluid lining the lungs, which is usually exhaled, it contains
various  components,  from small ions to proteins and organelles;
it may even contain viruses, fungi, and bacteria. Taking  samples
of the condensate is safe, totally non‐invasive, easy to perform,
it may be repeated many times, it may also be  performed  on  pa‐
tients with severe complications of COVID‐19; its enormous advan‐
tage is that in may be performed in small children, with the  use
of  special  facial  masks. The course of the examination is such
that the patient is requested to exhale, when breathing  unevent‐
fully for some 10‐15 min, to an apparatus provided with a cooling
system, which allows us to accumulate  the  condensate  in  which
SARS‐CoV‐2  may be detected. The application of this method seems
justified from a public health perspective.  The  false  positive
results  that  are  presently  obtained  contribute the continued
spread of the virus worldwide [38,39].  The optimization of labo‐
ratory  diagnostics  is  the most dynamically developing field in
the  time  of  the  COVID‐19  pandemic,  supporting  contemporary
medicine, government decisions and healthcare strategies. The ef‐
forts of scientistclinician teams focus, first of all,  upon  im‐
plementing  the  most reliable diagnostic tools; however, because
COVID‐19 is a new nosological entity, there are not  enough  data
as  of  yet  that would enable the determination of standards for
the interpretation of serological POCTs.  As with any  other  in‐
fectious  diseases,  the  diagnostic  value of a test is not only
about the method of collecting the material, the quality  of  the
sample  and  the  equipment  applied. Equally essential procedure
(storage and handling) prior to analysis, from the moment of col‐
lecting  the biological material to the assaying stage.  Funding:
This study received  no  external  funding.   Lau,  S.K.P.;  Woo,
P.C.Y.;  Yip,  C.C.Y.; Tse, H.; Tsoi, H.; Cheng, V.C.C.; Lee, P.;
Tang, B.S.F.; Cheung, C.H.Y.; Lee, R.A.; et al. Coronavirus  HKU1
and  Other Coronavirus Infections in Hong Kong. J. Clin. Microbi‐
ol. 2006, 44, 20632071. [CrossRef] [PubMed] World Health  Organi‐
zation. Advice on the Use of Point‐Of‐Care Immunodiagnostic Tests
for COVID‐19.  Corman, V.; Bleicker, T.; Brnink, S.; Drosten, C.;
Landt,  O.;  Koopmans, M.; Zambon, M. Diagnostic Detection of Lu,
X.; Chen, Y.; Bai, B.; Hu, H.; Tao, L.; Yang, J.; Chen, J.; Chen,
Z.;  Hu,  Z.;  Wang,  H.  Immune  responses  against 122, 496502.
[CrossRef] [PubMed] Liu, W.; Liu, L.; Kou, G.; Zheng,  Y.;  Ding,
Y.;  Ni,  W.; Wang, Q.; Tan, L.; Wu, W.; Tang, S.; et al. Evalua‐
tion of Nucleocapsid and Spike Protein‐based ELISAs for detecting
antibodies  against  SARS‐CoV‐2.  J.  Clin.  Microbiol. 2020, 58,
e00461‐20.  [CrossRef]  Corman,  V.M.;  Landt,  O.;  Kaiser,  M.;
Molenkamp, R.; Meijer, A.; Chu, D.K.W.; Bleicker, T.; Brnink, S.;
Schneider, J.; Schmidt, M.L.; et  al.  Detection  of  2019  novel
coronavirus  (2019‐nCoV)  by  real‐time RT‐PCR.  Eurosurveillance
2020, 25, 2000045. [CrossRef] Vashist, S.K. In  Vitro  Diagnostic
Assays  for COVID‐19: Recent Advances and Emerging Trends.  Diag‐
nostics 2020, 10, 202. [CrossRef] Shereen, M.A.; Khan, S.; Kazmi,
A.;  Bashir,  N.; Siddique, R. COVID‐19 infection: Origin, trans‐
mission, and characteristics of human coronaviruses. J. Adv. Res.
2020,  24,  9198. [CrossRef] [PubMed] (accessed on 13 June 2020).
Deepak, S.A.; Kottapalli, K.R.; Rakwal, R.; Oros,  G.;  Rangappa,
K.S.; Iwahashi, H.; Masuo, Y.; Agrawal, G.K.  Real‐Time PCR: Rev‐
olutionizing Detection and Expression Analysis  of  Genes.  Curr.
Genom. 2007, 8, 234251.  [CrossRef] [PubMed] vivalytic‐tests/vri‐
multiplex‐test/ (accessed on 9 May 2020).  Huang, W.E.; Lim,  B.;
Hsu,  C.C.;  Xiong,  D.; Wu, W.; Yu, Y.; Jia, H.; Wang, Y.; Zeng,
Y.; Ji, M.; et al. RT‐LAMP for  rapid  diagnosis  of  coronavirus
SARS‐CoV‐2. Microb. Biotechnol. 2020, 13, 950961. [CrossRef] Cui,
Z.; Chang, H.; Wang, H.; Lim, B.; Hsu, C.C.;  Yu,  Y.;  Jia,  H.;
Wang,  Y.;  Zeng,  Y.; Ji, M.; et al. Development of a rapid test
kit for SARS‐CoV‐2: An example of product design. Biodes.  Manuf.
2020,  14.  [CrossRef]  Moran,  A.; Beavis, K.G.; Matushek, S.M.;
Ciaglia, C.; Francois, N.; Tesic, V.; Love, N. The  Detection  of
SARS‐CoV‐2  using  the  Cepheid Xpert Xpress SARS‐CoV‐2 and Roche
cobas SARS‐CoV‐2 Assays. J. Clin.   Microbiol.  2020.  [CrossRef]
[PubMed]  Watson,  J.;  Whiting, P.F.; Brush, J.E. Interpreting a
covid‐19 test result. BMJ 2020, 369, m1808. [PubMed] West,  C.P.;
Montori,  V.M.;  Sampathkumar,  P. COVID‐19 Testing: TheThreat of
False‐Negative Results.  Mayo Clin. Proc. 2020. [CrossRef] Lippi,
G.;  Salvagno,  G.L.;  Pegoraro,  M.;  Militello,  V.; Caloi, C.;
Peretti, A.; Gaino, S.; Bassi, A.; Bovo, C.; Lo  Cascio,  G.  As‐
sessment  of  immune  response to SARS‐CoV‐2 with fully automated
MAGLUMI 2019‐nCoV IgG  and  IgM  chemiluminescence  immunoassays.
Clin.  Chem. Lab. Med. 2020. [CrossRef] Hsueh, P.R.; Huang, L.M.;
Chen, P.J.; Kao, C.L.; Yang, P.C. Chronological evolution of IgM,
IgA, IgG and neutralisation antibodies after infection with SARS‐
associated coronavirus. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 2004, 10,  Guan,
M.; Chen, H.Y.; Foo, S.Y.; Tan, Y.J.; Goh, P.Y.; Wee, S.H. Recom‐
binant protein‐based enzyme‐linked immunosorbent  assay  and  im‐
munochromatographic tests for detection of immunoglobulin G anti‐
bodies to severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus in
SARS  patients.  Clin.  Diagnost. Lab. Immunol. 2004, Kogaki, H.;
Uchida, Y.; Fujii, N.; Kurano, Y.; Miyake, K.; Kido, Y.;  Kariwa,
H.; Takashima, I.; Tamashiro, H.; Ling, A.‐E.; et al. Novel rapid
immunochromatographic test based on an enzyme immunoassay for de‐
tecting  nucleocapsid  antigen in SARS‐associated coronavirus. J.
Clin. Lab. Anal. 2005, 19, 150159. [CrossRef] Koczula, K.M.; Gal‐
lotta,  A. Lateral flow assays. Essays Biochem. 2016, 60, 111120.
Oh, J.‐S.; Ha, G.‐W.; Cho, Y.‐S.; Kim,  M.J.;  An,  D.J.;  Hwang,
K.K.;  Lim,  Y.K.; Park, B.K.; Kang, B.; Song, D.S.  One Step Im‐
munochromatography Assay Kit for Detecting Antibodies  to  Canine
Parvovirus.  Clin.  Vaccine Immunol. 2006, 13, 520524. [CrossRef]
Posthuma‐Trumpie, G.A.; Korf, J.; van Amerongen, A. Lateral  flow
(immuno)assay:   Its  strengths,  weaknesses,  opportunities  and
threats. A literature survey. Anal.  Bioanal.  Chem.  2009,  393,
569582.  [CrossRef] Strenburg, E.; Junker, R. Point‐of‐care test‐
ing in microbiology: The  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  im‐
munochromatographic  test strips. Dtsch. Arztebl. Int. 2009, 106,
4854. [PubMed] Li, Z.; Yi, Y.; Luo, X.; Xiong, N.; Liu,  Y.;  Li,
S.;  Sun,  R.; Wang, Y.; Hu, B.; Chen, W.; et al. Development and
clinical application of a rapid IgM‐IgG  combined  antibody  test
for SARS‐CoV‐2 infection diagnosis. J. Med.  Virol. 2020. [Cross‐
Ref]  [PubMed]  covid19serology/  (accessed  on  13  June  2020).
Lauer, S.A.; Grantz, K.H.; Bi, Q.; Jones, F.K.; Zheng, Q.; Mered‐
ith, H.R.; Azman, A.S.; Reich, N.G.; Lessler, J.  The  Incubation
Period  of  Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID‐19) From Publicly Re‐
ported Confirmed Cases: Estimation and Application. Ann.  Intern.
Med.  2020.  [CrossRef]  Melton, L. Protein arrays: Proteomics in
multiplex. Nature  2004,  429,  101107.  [CrossRef]  Hall,  D.A.;
Ptacek,  J.; Snyder, M. Protein microarray technology. Mech. Age‐
ing. Dev. 2007, 128, 161167.  [CrossRef] [PubMed]  Zhu,  H.;  Hu,
S.;  Jona,  G.;  Zhu, X.; Kreiswirth, N.; Willey, B.M.; Mazzulli,
T.; Liu, G.; Song, Q.; Chen, P.; et al.  Severe acute respiratory
syndrome  diagnostics  using  a  coronavirus  protein microarray.
Proc. Natl. Acad.   Sci.  USA  2006,  103,  40114016.  [CrossRef]
[PubMed]  Molecular  and  Antibody Point‐Of‐Care Tests to Support
the Screening, Diagnosis and Monitoring of Wang, X.;  Zhong,  M.;
Liu,  Y.;  Ma,  P.; Dang, L.; Meng, Q.; Wan, W.; Ma, X.; Liu, J.;
Yang, G.; et al. Rapid and Sensitive Detection of COVID‐19  Using
CRISPR/Cas12a‐based    Detection    with   Naked   Eye   Readout,
CRISPR/Cas12a‐NER. Sci. Bull. (Beijing) 2020.  [CrossRef]  Khoub‐
nasabjafari,  M.; Jouyban‐Gharamaleki, V.; Ghanbari, R.; Jouyban,
A. Exhaled breath condensate as a potential specimen for diagnos‐
ing  COVID‐19.  Bioanalysis 2020. [CrossRef] Jerzynska, J.; Brzo‐
zowska, A.; Bobrowska‐Korzeniowska, M.; Grzelewski, T.; Stelmach,
I.  Usefulness  of  exhaled  breath  condensate for evaluation of
markers of airway inflammation in children with asthma.  Pediatr.
Pol. 2009, 84, 437445. [CrossRef]











