Cardiac risk factors and prevention ORIGINAL RESEARCH Maria Elena
Flacco,1 Cecilia Acuti Martellucci,2 Francesca  Bravi,3  Giustino
Parruti,4  Rosaria  Cappadona,1 Alfonso Mascitelli,5 Roberto Man‐
fredini,6 Lorenzo G Mantovani,7,8 Lamberto Manzoli  1
 Additional material is Department of Medical Ferrara, Emilia‐Ro‐
magna,  Italy Surgery, Ancona, Marche, Italy Arcispedale SantAnna
Medical Department, Cona, Emilia‐ Romagna, Italy Infectious  Dis‐
eases  Unit,  Local  Health  Unit  of  Pescara, Pescara, Regional
Healthcare Agency of  Abruzzo,  Pescara,  Italy  Dipartimento  di
Scienze  Mediche,  Universita  degli  Studi  di Ferrara, Ferrara,
Italy Center for Public Health Bicocca, Milano, Lombardia,  IRCCS
MultiMedica,  Sesto San Giovanni, Lombardia, Italy Correspondence
to Professor Lamberto Manzoli, Ferrara, Ferrara 44121, Italy; MEF
and CAM contributed Revised 9 June 2020 Objective It has been hy‐
pothesised that the use of ACE inhibitors and angiotensin  recep‐
tor  blockers  (ARBs) might either increase or reduce the risk of
severe or lethal COVID‐19. The findings from the available obser‐
vational studies varied, and summary estimates are urgently need‐
ed to elucidate whether these drugs should  be  suspended  during
the pandemic, or patients and physicians should be definitely re‐
assured. This meta‐analysis of adjusted observational data  aimed
to  summarise  the  existing  evidence on the association between
these  medications  and  severe/lethal  COVID‐19.    Methods   We
searched  MedLine,  Scopus and preprint repositories up to 8 June
2020 to retrieve cohort or casecontrol studies comparing the risk
of  severe/fatal  COVID‐19 (either mechanical ventilation, inten‐
sive care unit admission or death), among  hypertensive  subjects
treated  with:  (1) ACE inhibitors, (2) ARBs and (3) both, versus
untreated subjects. Data  were  combined  using  a  random‐effect
generic  inverse  variance  approach.   Results  Ten studies, en‐
rolling 9890 hypertensive subjects were included in the analyses.
Compared  with  untreated  subjects,  those  using either ACE in‐
hibitors or ARBs showed  a  similar  risk  of  severe  or  lethal
COVID‐19  (summary  OR:  0.90;  95%  CI  0.65 to 1.26 for ACE in‐
hibitors; 0.92; 95% CI 0.75 to 1.12 for ARBs).  The  results  did
not  change  when both drugs were considered together, when death
was the outcome and excluding the studies with  significant,  di‐
vergent  results.   Conclusion The present meta‐analysis strongly
supports the recommendation of several  scientific  societies  to
continue  ARBs  or ACE inhibitors for all patients, unless other‐
wise advised by their physicians who should  thus  be  reassured.
employer(s))  2020.  Re‐use  permitted under CC BY‐NC. No by BMJ.
To cite: Flacco ME, Acuti Martellucci C, Bravi F, print:  [please
include  Day With the spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS‐CoV‐2) pandemic, evidence is rapidly  accumu‐
lating  on  the risk factors of severe COVID‐19 and death. In the
wake of some preliminary, unadjusted reports,14 individuals  with
pre‐  existing  comorbidities  such as hypertension, diabetes and
cardiovascular diseases have been identified as those highly vul‐
nerable.5  Notably,  such  chronic  conditions frequently require
prescription of ACE inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor block‐
ers  (ARBs).6  Animal studies showed that ACE inhibitors and ARBs
upregulate ACE2 expression7 and, as coronaviruses bind their tar‐
get  cells  through ACE2, concerns have been expressed that these
therapies might facilitate infection with SARS‐CoV‐2 and increase
the risk of severe or fatal COVID‐19.6 8 In contrast, it has been
suggested that ACE inhibitors and ARBs could benefit infected pa‐
tients, as ACE2 converts angiotensin II (with known vasoconstric‐
tive, proinflammatory and fibrotic effects) into angiotensin  17,
which  may protect lungs from acute injury, and upregulating ACE2
through therapy may enhance this process.9 In this uncertain sce‐
nario,  some  observational  studies  with multivariable analyses
found no association between use  of  reninangiotensinaldosterone
system (RAAS) inhibitors and COVID‐19 severity,1016 a few studies
found a significant reduction in the risk of death or severe dis‐
ease17 18 and one study found a increased risk of mechanical ven‐
tilation and admission to the intensive care  unit  (ICU).19  The
magnitude  of  the  association also varied across studies, which
differed for patients characteristics, setting (inpatient or out‐
patient),  population  targeted  by serological testing protocols
and extent of measured confounding.  Summary  estimates  are  ur‐
gently  needed  to  elucidate  whether these drugs, that are pre‐
scribed to tens of millions patients worldwide,20 should be  sus‐
pended  during the pandemic, or patients and physicians should be
definitely reassured.7 We thus carried  out  a  meta‐analysis  to
summarise the existing evidence from adjusted analyses on the as‐
sociation between RAAS inhibitors  and  COVID‐19.   Bibliographic
search,  data extraction and quality We searched MEDLINE and Sco‐
pus databases, up to 11 May 2020, for studies evaluating the risk
of  severe and/or fatal COVID‐19 among ACE inhibitors and/or ARBs
users versus non‐ users. The following search strategy was adopt‐
ed,  without  language restrictions: COVID‐19 [Title/Abstract] OR
Coronavirus [Title/Abstract] OR SARS‐CoV‐2  [Title/Abstract]  AND
angiotensin*  [Title/Abstract].  was also screened for additional
pertinent papers.  In the context of a public  health  emergency,
there  is urgency to make research findings available,21 and sev‐
eral relevant clinical data have been shared in  public  preprint
repositories: we thus extended the in MedRxiv. Inclusion criteria
were: (A) cohort or Treatment with ACE  inhibitors  or  ARBs  and
risk of severe/lethal COVID‐19: a meta‐analysis Cardiac risk fac‐
tors and prevention The informed consent was not required, as the
study did not enrol human subjects.  casecontrol design; (B) lab‐
oratory confirmation of SARS‐CoV‐2 infection status  through  PCR
assay of nasal or pharyngeal swab specimens; (C) available infor‐
mation on underlying comorbidities and pharmacological treatments
at  the  time  of  COVID‐19;  and  (D)  data available to compare
COVID‐19 severity by RAAS who extracted the study characteristics
and  measures  of  effect.   contacted  (LM),  and  consensus was
achieved through discussion.  Individual study  quality  was  as‐
sessed  using  an adapted version of the Newcastle Ottawa Quality
Assessment Scale, assessing the comparability across  groups  for
confounding  factors,  the appropriateness of outcome assessment,
length of follow‐up and missing data  handling  and  reporting.22
Data  analysis  Data  were combined using a random‐effect generic
inverse variance approach23 in order to account for between‐study
heterogeneity.  Missing  SEs were computed from 95% CIs following
standard Cochrane methodology. If a paper reported the results of
different  multivariable  models, the most stringently controlled
estimates (those from the model adjusting for more factors)  were
extracted.  If different models controlled for the same number of
covariates, the model containing the most  clinically  meaningful
covariates  was  used for the analysis.24 study heterogeneity was
quantified using the I2 statistic. Potential publication bias was
assessed graphically, using funnel plots (displaying the Relative
Risks from individual comparisons versus their precision  (1/SE).
Given  that  the  total  number of publications included for each
outcome was <10, we could not use formal tests  for  funnel  plot
asymmetry:  in  such  cases,  the power is too low to distinguish
chance from real The units of the meta‐analysis were single  com‐
parisons  of: (A) ACE inhibitors, (B) ARBs users and (C) both ACE
inhibitors Of the 553 papers initially retrieved,  five  casecon‐
trol  and  five  Overall,  the studies included 9890 hypertensive
subjects; four studies included  only  COVID‐19  symptomatic  pa‐
tients requiring Europe,1012 14 16 17 two in the USA15 19 and two
in China.13 18 The mean age ranged from 58 to 69 years,  and  the
sample size ranged from 20517 to 6272.14 The methodological char‐
acteristics of the included studies are ascertainment of the  ex‐
posure  and  the evaluation of the comparability of subjects were
adequate in all studies, while 8 out of 10  adequately  addressed
the  items pertaining to outcome assessment and follow‐up (length
and missing data). One study had a high risk of misclassification
bias,  as  the  proportions of hypertensive subjects treated with
ACE inhibitors (16.4%) or ARBs (13.2%) were  particularly  low.19
Risk of severe/lethal COVID‐19 A total of five studies, enrolling
7489 hypertensive patients, were included  in  the  meta‐analysis
comparing  the  risk  of  severe/ lethal COVID‐19 between ACE in‐
hibitors users versus non‐ or lethal disease was comparable among
treated  and untreated patients (summary OR: 0.90; 95% CI 0.65 to
1.26). Two studies showed significant results, with opposite  di‐
rection.  The first included 682 hypertensive subjects and showed
an increased risk of severe illness among the 112 patients treat‐
ed  with  ACE  inhibitors.19 The second enrolled 105 hypertensive
subjects and reported a lower  risk  among  the  38  treated  pa‐
tients.17  Excluding  one or both of these studies did not change
the results, which remained non‐significant (all  p>0.05).   Five
studies,  enrolling  7462 hypertensive subjects, were included in
the meta‐analysis comparing the risk of  severe  illness  All  of
them  showed  non‐significant differences between treated and un‐
treated patients, with a summary OR of  0.92;  95%  CI  When  the
above  antihypertensive treatments were considered together (five
studies, enrolling 11 334 hypertensive patients),10 11 14  15  19
the  risk  of developing severe COVID‐19 was again comparable be‐
tween treated and untreated patients Risk of death from  COVID‐19
The  risk  of death among RAAS inhibitors users versus non‐ users
was compared in four studies, including a total of 2412 and  ARBs
users,   versus  non  users,  in  predicting:  (1)  severe/lethal
COVID‐19 (presence of either ICU admission,  mechanical  ventila‐
tion or death) and (2) lethal COVID‐19. When a study only report‐
ed separate estimates for ACE inhibitors or ARBs  users,  or  for
the  different  outcomes  included  in  the definition of severe/
lethal COVID‐19 (eg, ICU  admission  and  mechanical  ventilation
separately),  the  overall estimate of risk was computed from the
separate relative risks using the fixed‐effect model for  generic
inverse variance outcomes.24 All meta‐analyses were performed us‐
ing RevMan software, V.5.3 (The  Cochrane  Collaboration,  2019).
Cardiac  risk  factors  and prevention Characteristics of the in‐
cluded studies Study design de Abajo11 The Lancet Giorgi  Rossi12
No.  of  Mean age Severe/lethal COVID‐19 Logistic regression (ICU
and death).  adjusted for age, gender and comorbidities.   venti‐
lation,  ICU and death); (2) death.  Logistic regression adjusted
for age, gender and comorbidities Severe  COVID‐19  Logistic  re‐
gression adjusted for age, gender, variables) and Cox proportion‐
al hazard analysis adjusted for  age,  gender  and  Charlson  Se‐
vere/lethal  COVID‐19  Logistic  regression (dyspnoea, resp. rate
adjusted for gender and SaO2 93%, mech.   Severe/lethal  COVID‐19
Logistic  regression (ICU and death), adjusted forage, gender and
comorbidities.  Severe/lethal COVID‐19 Logistic  regression  (ICU
and  mech.   adjusted  for  age,  gender  and comorbidities.  Se‐
vere/lethal COVID‐19 Analysis propensity (mech. ventilation,  ICU
score‐matched for and death).  age, gender, race, BMI, smoke, co‐
morbidities and Clin Infect Cox proportional hazard analysis  ad‐
justed  for  age,  gender  and  comorbidities.  Circ Res Analysis
propensity score‐matched for age, gender, comorbidities  and  in‐
hospital therapy.  Extracted outcome(s) Method for adjustment Lo‐
gistic regression adjusted for age, race, comorbidities and *Cas‐
es were COVID‐19 patients; controls were SARS‐CoV‐2 negative sub‐
jects extracted from primary healthcare databases: as  such,  the
number  of hypertensive subjects includes both cases and controls
and is higher than the number of COVID‐19  patients.   Number  of
patients with severe COVID‐19 among only those with hypertension.
Included only in sensitivity analyses.  ARBs, Angiotensin  recep‐
tor  blockers;  ICU,  intensive care unit; mech., mechanical; NR,
not reported; SARS‐CoV‐2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coro‐
navirus  2.  the Newcastle Ottawa Scale de Abajo11 Giorgi Rossi12
hypertensive subjects.10 12 16 18 Overall, no differences in risk
emerged  between the two groups, with a summary OR of from China,
enrolling 1128 hospitalised hypertensive patients, showed a  sig‐
nificant  risk  reduction  among treated subjects18; when its re‐
sults were excluded from the analyses, the overall estimates  did
not change (pooled OR 0.95; 95% CI 0.76 to 1.18). Another study25
assessed the risk of death among ACE inhibitors/ARBs users versus
non users and was initially included in the meta‐analysis. Howev‐
er, this study was later retracted26; thus, it was excluded  from
the  main analyses and included into a sensitivity analysis: with
or without the study, the summary estimate did not change (pooled
OR 0.85; 95% CI 0.81 to 1.03).  Two main findings emerge from the
present meta‐analysis, which included the adjusted  estimates  of
10 observational studies and No. of infected Cardiac risk factors
and prevention No. of OR (95% CI) P value versus non‐users. ARBs,
angiotensin  receptor  blockers.   1.  Severe/fatal COVID‐19* (in
users vs non users): ACE inhibitors ARBs only10 1315 19 2.  Death
from  COVID‐19 (in users vs non users): a. Main analysis: b. Sen‐
sitivity analysis: All meta‐analyses are based on a  generic  in‐
verse  variance  approach.   *Including  admission into intensive
care unit, need for mechanical ventilation or Including  one  re‐
tracted  study.25  26  ARBs, angiotensin receptor blockers; RAAS,
reninangiotensinaldosterone.  almost  10  000  hypertensive  sub‐
jects:  first, no significant differences in the risk of develop‐
ing severe or fatal COVID‐19 were observed between  the  subjects
treated with either ACE inhibitors or ARBs, as compared with non‐
users. Second, and importantly, the results did not change  after
the  exclusion of the three studies, which reported either a sig‐
nificantly higher or lower risk of severe illness  among  treated
patients.  The present findings provide solid evidence from prop‐
erly adjusted estimates across different countries on the absence
of  risk  from  RAAS  inhibitors  treatment  during the pandemic,
strongly supporting the statements of several  experts27  28  and
scientific  societies, including the European Medicines Agency,29
the European Society of Cardiology30 and the American Heart Asso‐
ciation,31  who  recommend continuation of ARBs or ACE inhibitors
medication. Although the present findings do not support the  hy‐
pothesis of a beneficial effect from therapy during the necessary
time required for randomised data to come,  patients  and  physi‐
cians  can  be  reassured.  Some limitations should be considered
when interpreting the present findings. First, two meta‐ analyses
showed an intermediate‐to‐high level of heterogeneity. However, a
certain large variation in terms of setting and baseline patients
characteristics. Also, when the analyses were repeated adopting a
fixed approach, none of the results substantially  differed  (ex‐
cept for CIs, which were typically tighter). Second, although all
studies (with a single exception)13 provided  analyses  at  least
adjusted  for versus non‐users.  age, gender and several underly‐
ing comorbidities, some extent of residual confounding cannot  be
completely ruled out, as for any observational study.32 Third, as
shown in the funnel plots in the more than five studies, thus  it
was  not  possible to perform a meaningful evaluation of publica‐
tion bias. However, given the public health  relevance  of  these
data,  it is unlikely that non‐ significant findingswith reassur‐
ing implicationshave been withheld. Rather, it  is  certain  that
large  dataset will be available soon. Given the urgency for mil‐
lions of patients, we decided not to wait, but the present  meta‐
analysis  will  have  to be updated as inclusion bias, due to the
presence of multiple effect estimates that can be extracted  from
individual studies,33 is likely to be low, as only one of the in‐
cluded studies reported more than an adjusted estimate,18 and the
results  of the meta‐analysis including the alternate estimate of
effect were unchanged (pooled OR of death 0.88; 95%  CI  0.68  to
1.13).   Acknowledging  these caveats, the present meta‐analysis,
based on 10 studies and almost 10 000 hypertensive subjects,  did
not  find  any association between COVID‐19 severity or mortality
and treatment with ARBs, ACE inhibitors or  both,  strongly  sup‐
porting  the  recommendation  of  several scientific societies to
continue ARBs or ACE inhibitors medication for all patients,  un‐
less  otherwise  advised  by their physicians, who should thus be
reassured.  RC, LGM and LaM), conduct (MEF, CAM, FB, GP, RC,  AM,
RM,  LGM)  and reporting (MEF, FB, GP, AM, RM, LGM and LM) of the
present work.  users versus non‐users. ARBs, angiotensin receptor
blockers.   users. ARBs, angiotensin receptor blockers.  subjects
treated with RAAS inhibitors versus untreated  subjects,  overall
and  by  drug  class Cardiac risk factors and prevention Key mes‐
sages respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 positive subjects showed
an increased mortality and morbidity among hypertensive patients,
who were frequently treated with ACE  inhibitors  or  angiotensin
receptor  blockers  (ARBs).  Recently, some observational studies
with multivariable analyses found no  association  between  these
medications and COVID‐19 severity, a few studies found a signifi‐
cant reduction in the risk of death or  severe  disease  and  one
study found a increased risk of mechanical ventilation and admis‐
sion to the intensive care unit. The magnitude of the association
also  varied  across studies, which differed for patients charac‐
teristics, setting (inpatient or outpatient), population targeted
by serological testing protocols and extent of measured confound‐
ing.  What might this study add?
 This meta‐analysis is based on 10 adjusted observational studies
(enrolling  almost  10 000 hypertensive subjects), from different
countries, and provides the first summary estimate on the associ‐
ation between ACE inhibitors or ARBs use and COVID‐19 severity or
mortality. All analyses showed a comparable risk of severe or fa‐
tal  illness among treated and untreated subjects, either consid‐
ering ACE inhibitors or ARBs separately, or combined.  How  might
this impact on clinical practice?
 Given  that  ACE  inhibitors  and ARBs are prescribed to tens of
millions patients  worldwide,  summary  estimates  were  strongly
needed  to elucidate whether these drugs should be suspended dur‐
ing the pandemic, or patients and physicians should be definitely
reassured.  These findings strongly support the recommendation of
several scientific societies to continue ARBs or  ACE  inhibitors
medication  for  all  patients, unless otherwise advised by their
physicians.  Competing interests None declared.  Patient and pub‐
lic  involvement  Patients and/or the public were not involved in
the design, or conduct, or reporting, or dissemination  plans  of
this  research.   Patient  consent  for publication Not required.
Ethics approval The study complies with the Declaration  of  Hel‐
sinki.  As  a  meta‐ analysis, the protocol and study did not re‐
quire the approval  from  Ethics  Committee.   Data  availability
statement  Data  are  available  on  reasonable request. All data
properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made in‐
dicated, and the use 1 Yang X, Yu Y, Xu J, et al. Clinical course
and outcomes of critically ill patients with SARS‐CoV‐2 pneumonia
in  Wuhan, China: a single‐centered, retrospective, observational
study. Lancet Respir Med 2020;8:47581.  What is already known  on
this subject?
 Some  preliminary, unadjusted reports on severe acute 2 Guan WJ,
ZY N, Hu Y, et al. Clinical characteristics of  coronavirus  dis‐
ease  2019  in China. N Engl J Med 2020.  3 Guo T, Fan Y, Chen M,
et al. Cardiovascular implications of fatal outcomes of  patients
with  coronavirus  disease 2019 (COVID‐19). JAMA Cardiol 2020.  4
Wu Z, McGoogan JM. Characteristics of and Important Lessons  From
the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID‐19) Outbreak in China: Summa‐
ry of a Report of 72 314 Cases From the Chinese Center  for  Dis‐
ease  Control and Prevention. JAMA 2020 5 Yang J, Zheng Y, Gou X,
et al. Prevalence of comorbidities and its effects in 6  Karakiu‐
lakis G, Roth M. Are patients with hypertension and diabetes mel‐
litus at increased risk for COVID‐19 infection? Lancet Respir Med
2020.
 ldosterone  system 7 Vaduganathan M, Vardeny O, Michel T, et al.
Renin‐Angiotensin‐A inhibitors in patients with Covid‐19. N  Engl
J  Med 2020.  8 Zheng Y‐Y, Ma Y‐T, Zhang J‐Y, et al. COVID‐19 and
the cardiovascular system.  Nat  Rev  9  Bavishi  C,  Maddox  TM,
Messerli  FH.  Coronavirus  disease  2019  (COVID‐19) 10 Bravi F,
Flacco ME, Carradori T, et al. Predictors  of  severe  or  lethal
COVID‐19,  including angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and
angiotensin II receptor blockers, in a sample of infected Italian
citizens.  Plos  One 2020;15:e0235248.  11 de Abajo FJ, Rodrguez‐
Martn S, Lerma V, et  al.  Use  of  renin‐angiotensin‐aldosterone
system  inhibitors  and  risk  of COVID‐19 requiring admission to
hospital: a case‐ population study. Lancet  2020;395:170514.   12
Giorgi Rossi P, Marino M, Formisano D, et al. Characteristics and
outcomes of a cohort of SARS‐CoV‐2 patients in  the  province  of
Reggio  Emilia,  Italy. MedRxiv2020.  13 Liu Y, Huang F, Xu J, et
al. Anti‐Hypertensive angiotensin II receptor blockers associated
to  mitigation  of disease severity in elderly COVID‐19 patients.
14 Mancia G, Rea F, Ludergnani M, et al. Renin‐Angiotensin‐Aldos‐
terone  system  blockers  and  the risk of Covid‐19. N Engl J Med
2020;382:243140.  15 Reynolds HR, Adhikari S, Pulgarin C, et  al.
Renin‐Angiotensin‐A
 ldosterone  system inhibitors and risk of Covid‐19. N Engl J Med
2020.  16 Tedeschi S, Giannella M, Bartoletti M, et al.  Clinical
impact of renin‐angiotensin system inhibitors on in‐hospital mor‐
tality of patients with  hypertension  hospitalized  17  Bean  D,
Kraljevic  Z,  Searle  T, et al. Treatment with ACE‐inhibitors is
associated with less severe disease with SARS‐Covid‐19  infection
in  a  multi‐site  UK acute Hospital 18 Zhang P, Zhu L, Cai J, et
al. Association of inpatient use of angiotensin converting enzyme
inhibitors  and  angiotensin  II receptor blockers with mortality
among patients with hypertension hospitalized with COVID‐19. Circ
Res 2020.  19 Mehta N, Kalra A, Nowacki AS, et al. Association of
use of angiotensin‐converting enzyme inhibitors  and  angiotensin
II  receptor  blockers with testing positive for coronavirus dis‐
ease 2019 (COVID‐19). JAMA Cardiol 2020.  20  WHO.  COVID‐19  and
the  use of angiotensin‐converting enzyme inhibitors and receptor
blockers ‐ Scientific brief. WHO, 2020.  21 Carr D.  Sharing  re‐
search  data  and  findings  relevant  to  the  novel coronavirus
(COVID‐19) outbreak. secondary sharing research data and findings
relevant to the coronavirus‐c ovid‐19/o pen‐data 22 Wells G, Shea
B, OConnell D, et al. The Newcastle‐Ottawa scale  (NOS)  for  as‐
sessing  the  quality  of nonrandomised studies in meta‐analyses.
secondary the Newcastle‐ Ottawa scale  (NOS)  for  assessing  the
quality  of  nonrandomised  studies in meta‐ 23 Manzoli L, Flacco
ME, Boccia S, et al. Generic versus brand‐name drugs used in car‐
diovascular  diseases. Eur J Epidemiol 2016;31:35168.  24 Manfre‐
dini R, Fabbian F, Cappadona R, et al. Daylight saving  time  and
acute  25  Mehra  MR, Desai SS, Kuy S, et al. Cardiovascular dis‐
ease, drug therapy, and mortality in Covid‐19. N Engl J Med 2020.
26  Mehra  MR, Desai SS, Kuy S, et al. Retraction: cardiovascular
disease, drug therapy, and mortality in Covid‐19 2020. N  Engl  J
Med.  27 Kuster GM, Osswald S. Switching antihypertensive therapy
in times of COVID‐19: why we should wait for  the  evidence.  Eur
Heart J 2020;41:1857.  28 Kuster GM, Pfister O, Burkard T, et al.
SARS‐CoV2: should inhibitors of the renin‐angiotensin  system  be
withdrawn  in  patients  with  COVID‐19?  Eur Heart J 29 European
Medicines Agency. Ema advises continued use of medicines for  hy‐
pertension,  heart  or  kidney  disease during COVID‐19 pandemic,
2020.  Available:  hypertension‐h  eart‐kidney‐d   isease‐during‐
covid‐19‐p andemic [Accessed 20 Apr 30 European Society of Cardi‐
ology. Position statement of the ESC Council on  hypertension  on
ACE‐inhibitors  and  angiotensin  receptor blockers, 2020. Avail‐
able: Cardiac  risk  factors  and  prevention  physician?utm_cam‐
paign=sciencenews19‐20&utm_source=s  cience‐news&utm_ medium=phd‐
link&u tm_content=phd03‐17‐2 0 32 Thomas LE,  Bonow  RO,  Pencina
MJ. Understanding observational treatment comparisons in the set‐
ting of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‐19). JAMA Cardiol to  se‐
lective inclusion of trial effect estimates: empirical study. BMJ
Open  statement‐o  f‐the‐e  sc‐council‐on‐hypertension‐on‐ace‐in‐
hibitors‐and‐ang  [Accessed  31  American Hearth Association. Pa‐
tients taking ACE‐i and Arbs who contract COVID‐19 should contin‐
ue  treatment, unless otherwise advised by their physician, 2020.
contract‐c  ovid‐19‐s  hould‐continue‐treatment‐unless‐otherwise‐
advised‐by‐their‐































































