PLOS  ONE RESEARCH ARTICLE A scalable method of applying heat and
humidity  for  decontamination  of  N95  respirators  during  the
COVID‐19  crisis Loc Anderegg ID1,2*, Cole Meisenhelder ID1, Chiu
Oan Ngooi ID3, Lei Liao4, Wang Xiao4, Steven Chu5,6,  Yi  Cui7,8,
John M. Doyle1,2 Center for Ultracold Atoms, Cambridge, MA, Unit‐
ed States of America, 3 Environmental  Health  and  Safety,  Sci‐
ences, Menlo Park, CA, United States of America OPEN ACCESS Cita‐
tion: Anderegg L, Meisenhelder C, Ngooi CO, Liao L, Xiao  W,  Chu
S,  et al. (2020) A scalable method of applying heat and humidity
for decontamination of N95 respirators during the  COVID‐19  cri‐
sis.  PLoS ONE 15(7): e0234851.  Copyright:  2020 Anderegg et al.
This is an open permits unrestricted use, distribution,  and  re‐
production in any medium, provided the original Data Availability
Statement: The data are available org/). 4C Air provided  support
in the form of any additional role in the study design, data con‐
tributions section.  A lack of N95 Filtering  Facepiece  Respira‐
tors  (FFRs)  during  the  COVID‐19  crisis has placed healthcare
workers at risk. It is important for any N95  reuse  strategy  to
determine  the  effects that proposed protocols would have on the
physical functioning of the mask, as well as  the  practical  as‐
pects  of  implementation. Here we propose and implement a method
of heating N95 respirators with moisture (85C, 60‐85%  humidity).
We  test both mask filtration efficiency and fit to validate this
process. Our tests focus on the 3M 1860, 3M  1870,  and  3M  8210
Plus  N95 models. After five cycles of the heating procedure, all
three respirators pass both quantitative fit  testing  (score  of
>100)  and  show no degradation of mask filtration efficiency. We
also test the Chen Heng V9501 KN95 and HKYQ N95 finding no degra‐
dation  of  mask filtration efficiency, however even for unheated
masks these scored <50 for every fit  test.  The  heating  method
presented  here is scalable from individual masks to over a thou‐
sand a day with a single industrial convection oven, making  this
method practical for local application inside health‐care facili‐
ties.  While N95 filtering facepiece respirators (FFRs) were made
for  single  use  operation,  the  ongoing  COVID‐19 pandemic has
caused a shortage worldwide of these FFRs.  COVID‐19,  caused  by
the  SARS‐CoV‐2  virus,  has been shown to be very contagious and
spread through aerosolized droplets. These aerosols can remain in
the  air  for  hours,  increasing  the risk of contagion to those
nearby [1, 2]. In order for an N95 mask to be reused more safely,
the mask should be decontaminated of SARS‐CoV‐2 while maintaining
its filtration efficiency and fit factor [36].  Currently, limit‐
ed  information  is  known about SARS‐CoV‐2 inactivation. Initial
data indicate PLOS ONE following competing  interests:  S.C.  and
Y.C. are the co‐founders of 4C Air and owns the shares of 4C Air.
L.L and W.X. are paid employees of 4C Air. S.C.  and Y.C.  report
non‐financial support from 4C Air have a patent PCT/US2015/065608
(Air filter for 4C Air tested face masks from several manufactur‐
ers  that include 4C Airs masks and those of other manufacturers.
This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing
data and materials.  A scalable method of applying humid heat for
decontamination of N95 respirators  during  the  COVID‐19  crisis
that  70C  dry heat for one hour was sufficient to achieve >3 log
reduction in SARS‐CoV‐2 on FFRs [7].  The  addition  of  moisture
possibly plays a role in the inactivation of some viruses [8 10].
A study found viral inactivation at 70C for 5 minutes [11]  while
in a buffered solution.  SARS‐CoV‐1 has also been shown to be in‐
activated at temperatures of 60‐75C for 5‐30 minutes  in  various
liquid  media  [1214].  Other enveloped viruses, such as H1N1 and
H5N1 Influenza strains have been shown  to  be  inactivated  with
moist heat at 65C and over 50% humidity [810]. These studies also
found that dry heat alone was  not  enough  to  deactivate  H1N1.
While  previous  studies have looked at the effects of moist heat
on N95 FFRs, these were done at substantially lower  temperatures
of  60‐65C  [8,  10, 15, 16]. We also note that recent CDC guide‐
lines have indicated that moist heat is a reasonable  method  for
reusing  N95  FFRs  [3].  The resistance of Clostridium difficile
(C. diff.) spores at elevated temperature and moisture  was  also
studied  and  found  temperatures of 85C resulted in a 5 to 6 log
reduction in 15 minutes of heating in  a  buffer  solution  [17].
Here we present a scalable method of heating N95 effects of heat‐
ing under various humidity conditions and for multiple cycles  of
mask  reuse  N95  respirators  are  typically  made  of meltblown
polypropylene fabric. While this naturally  efficiency  plummets,
even  if  there  are  no  visual signs of degradation to the mask
[18]. Thus it is critical to run filtration tests on  any  decon‐
tamination  procedure. Physical characteristics of the FFRs, such
as the elasticity of the straps, which impact fit may be  altered
by  decontamination.  Fit  of the FFR must also be considered, as
degradation of the fit factor would indicate unfiltered  air  en‐
tering  the users lungs.  There are many practical considerations
which must be taken into account when trying to apply a decontam‐
ination  method to hospital‐scale operations [3, 4]. Masks should
ideally be returned to the same individual for many reasons,  in‐
cluding  fit  and  decreased  risk  of  spreading other diseases.
Avoiding any cross contamination between masks is also important.
Hospitals  with  limited  PPE allocations would also benefit from
rapid time turnaround capabilities if there is a critical  short‐
age  of  N95  FFRs, ideally decontaminating a clinicians mask be‐
tween shifts. Finally, the decontamination method  must  also  be
effective  in inactivating the target species [7], with 3 log re‐
duction required [19]. We note this method has now been  employed
in  a  hospital setting achieving the requite 3 log reduction for
biological indicators [20].  Heating protocol Here  we  place  an
N95  FFR in a 1.25 quart hard walled polypropylene container (Zi‐
ploc medium square), Fig 1. This ensures that  both  the  charged
layer  of the mask and the container are made of the same materi‐
al, which decreases the likelihood of  material  incompatibility,
which  could damage the inner layer or spoil the FFR. We found in
our tests that the rigid container is preferable to a bag  as  it
ensures  constant volume, leading to a constant humidity and pro‐
vides protection to the mask in the  handling  process.  In  each
container  is  added a small (2.5x2.5) paper towel (2‐ply), which
is wetted with 500(40) uL of water. The amount of water was  ini‐
tially  calibrated  with  a fixed number of water drops. This was
later replaced by a single channel  pipette  (Eppendorf  Research
Plus)  capable  of delivering volumes with 5L accuracy, which im‐
proved the repeatability of the humidity achieved (Fig  2b  shows
the  humidity  prior to this improvement.). In a hospital setting
this could be replaced with an insulin syringe for  example.  The
containers  are sealed by placing the cover on and then placed in
a PLOS ONE A scalable method of applying humid heat for decontam‐
ination  of N95 respirators during the COVID‐19 crisis Fig 1. Ex‐
perimental method. A: Each N95 FFR (1) was placed into a  plastic
container  with  a paper towel (2) with 500 uL of water. Both the
mask (3) and container (4) were labeled with a Sharpie black per‐
manent ink marker, which would allow the mask to be identified by
the correct healthcare worker and avoid cross contamination. B/C:
For  testing  purposes, the lid of each container was modified to
have a temperature and humidity sensor (B: SHT30 C: SHT31).  con‐
vection  oven  (Despatch  LAC1‐38‐8, 3.7 cu. Ft.). We note that a
convection oven produces to less than 1C regardless of the number
of  containers we place into this oven (1‐45 containers), Fig 2a.
It is important to note that a convection oven has no direct line
of  sight to any radiative heat sources, which would have the po‐
tential to damage the masks. For testing purposes,  the  lids  of
the  containers were modified to allow a temperature and humidity
sensor (SHT30 DFR0588 or SEK‐SHT31‐Sensors) inside. We found that
the humidity will drop rapidly in the presence of a small hole in
the lid. The gap between the wires and the lid  was  thus  sealed
with  10 minute epoxy with a working temperature of 93C. For tem‐
perature verification, we also used both a  K  type  thermocouple
(readout  with a SR630) and an IR thermometer Fig 3 shows the hu‐
midity as a function of time within each  container  for  various
volumes  of  water at various temperatures. We also find that the
humidity takes between 10‐15 minutes to reach the 60% level. This
is  an  important  consideration  when applying this method as at
least Fig 2. Temperature and humidity traces. A: Temperature rise
to  the set point in around 10 minutes with 45 containers vs only
6 containers, the temperature rise time is similar and final tem‐
perature  are  identical.  Inset Left: 6 containers with humidity
and temperature logging. Inset Right: 3.7 cu ft oven fully loaded
with 45 containers. B: Temperature and humidity of 3M masks which
underwent filter testing during 5 heat cycles. The shaded  region
indicates  our target range of 60‐85% humidity.  PLOS ONE A scal‐
able method of applying humid heat  for  decontamination  of  N95
respirators during the COVID‐19 crisis Fig 3. Humidity versus wa‐
ter volume at various temperatures. Humidity curves  for  various
water  volumes  at A: 70C B: 75C C: 80C d: 85C in a 1.25 qt. con‐
tainer. Each humidity curve shown is an average of  3  runs.   10
additional  minutes  should  be  added  to  the  heating cycle to
achieve the desired time at target humidity. The temperature ris‐
es to within 2C of the target temperature in a similar time.  The
containers are placed into the convection oven  for  40  minutes.
This is due to the fact that it takes approximately 10 minutes to
reach the 60% humidity  level  inside  the  container.   lid  was
opened  and rotated 45 degrees and placed back on top of the con‐
tainer, leaving air to naturally flow around  the  FFR.  This  is
done  while the container is still warm and we find that the pro‐
cessed mask is dry in under 5 minutes and the  atmosphere  inside
the  container is the same or slightly below ambient humidity af‐
ter the lid is resealed. For storage in the container (or a  bag,
if  moved out of the container) the humidity could be further re‐
duced if desired by adding a  very  inexpensive  small  desiccant
pouch into the container.  To test whether any degradation of the
masks occured, we measure the filtration  efficiency  after  five
decontamination  cycles. This number of cycles was chosen as pre‐
vious reports, which also considered the 3M 1860, have shown that
in  the  absence  of any decontamination treatment five cycles of
donning could be performed safely before fit tests began to  fail
consistently  [21].  We tested the 3M 1860 (The 1860 masks avail‐
able were manufactured in 2006, with a shelf  life  of  5  years.
Hence  they  were 9 years expired at the time of testing. The CDC
states that model 1860 masks beyond the manufacturer  shelf  life
have  been  PLOS ONE A scalable method of applying humid heat for
decontamination of N95 respirators during the COVID‐19 crisis Fig
4.  Masks  after  5  heat  cycles. A: 3M 1860; Slight blurring of
printed label, no other visible changes. B: 3M 8210 Plus;  Slight
blurring  of  the printed label. C: 3M 1870; Delamination of part
of the foam nose bridge shown here after 5 cycles. The  foam  was
reset  in  place prior to donning and still passed all fit tests.
shown to still be in accordance with NIOSH performance  standards
[22].) surgical N95, 3M 1870 surgical N95, 3M 8210 Plus N95, Chen
Heng V9501 KN95 (certified to the  GB26262006  standard),  and  a
HKYQ   N95(Zhejiang   FDA   Medical  Device  Product  Certificate
20120065, certified to the GB19083 standard). We perform  quanti‐
tative fit test measurements after each decontamination cycle. We
used a separate batch of masks for the filtration and  fit  tests
as  the  masks  used for fit testing must be modified to adapt to
the fit testing apparatus and are worn by a user.  After the  de‐
contamination  cycles the masks are inspected for any qualitative
degradation.  The most prominent effect observed was the  delami‐
nation  of the foam nose bridge on the 1870 mask, Fig 4c. Notice‐
able blurring of the printed labels on the  1860  and  8210  plus
models,  Fig  4a and 4b, was also seen.  Fit test methods and re‐
sults The fit tests were performed with a TSI PortaCount Respira‐
tor Fit Tester 8038 using NaCl for variability in face structure.
The user gave verbal consent to participate in the study. We used
the  OSHA  modified  ambient  aerosol Condensation Nuclei Counter
(CNC) Quantitative Fit Test for Filtering Facepiece  Respirators.
This  produces  a  quantitative  fit factor score for each of the
four test components (bending over, talking, head side  to  side,
head  up  and  down) as well as an overall fit factor computed as
the geometric mean of these four scores. A passing score is given
in each category for a fit factor 100, but any individual catego‐
ry may be failed so long as the overall fit factor is 100 in  or‐
der to pass the OSHA test. Additionally, the system does not pro‐
vide a fit factor score greater than 200,  and  instead  gives  a
maximum  possible score of 200+. Each fit test sequence takes ap‐
proximately two minutes and 30 seconds. For these tests each mask
was  punctured and fitted with a metal hose adapter to connect to
the PortaCount via 3/16 ID tubing.  Prior to  starting  each  fit
test measurement, the user donned the mask and performed a exhal‐
ing. The user then made small adjustments to the fit of the  mask
based on the results of this seal check. After each fit test mea‐
surement the user doffed the mask to simulate the wear  and  tear
produced through donning and doffing masks.  The protocol we per‐
formed used two masks of each type, one of which was  treated  as
the control, and did not undergo heating, and one mask which went
through five decontamination cycles. Each mask in the test  group
was fit tested prior to the decontamination cycles to ensure that
the mask was not defective. Masks in the test group  that  passed
this  initial fit test PLOS ONE A scalable method of applying hu‐
mid heat  for  decontamination  of  N95  respirators  during  the
COVID‐19 crisis failure of the fit test. Green shaded cells indi‐
cate successful fit tests. The cycle number indicates the  number
of heating cycles the test group had undergone at the time of fit
Mask Type HKYQ N95 Control or Test Overall Fit  Factor  HKYQ  N95
Chen  Heng  V9501 KN95 Chen Heng V9501 KN95 were then run through
the decontamination cycle five times. Between each cycle the test
mask  was  removed from the container and fit tested. The control
group masks were fit tested six times to correspond to  the  ini‐
tial fit test and the fit test the test group masks would receive
after each decontamination cycle. After the fifth decontamination
cycle for the test group masks, we performed three additional fit
tests. This was done to provide a better sampling of any variance
in  the  users  ability  to  form  a tight seal with the mask and
demonstrate whether there had been any degradation  at  the  very
end  of the cycles.  HKYQ N95 mask both failed the initial quali‐
tative user seal checks, and the fit test. As a  result,  we  de‐
clined  to process these masks through the decontamination cycles
and only performed further tests on the control group  to  deter‐
mine  their  fit  factor.  The  two 3M mask models, 8210 Plus and
1860, both passed the fit test on every trial, and  achieved  the
maximum  possible  fit  factors after five heating cycles. The 3M
1870 also passed all fit tests, however with  lower  fit  factors
after  the  decontamination procedure. This is most likely due to
the delamination of the nose bridge foam from the mask,  Fig  4c.
This  foam  was pressed back into place by the user prior to don‐
ning.  There is a trend in which fit tests of the 1860, and to  a
lesser degree the 8210 Plus and 1870, which were performed earli‐
er in the experiment showed lower fit  factors  than  those  per‐
formed later. This is best explained by both a training effect as
the user gained experience with the particular  mask  models  and
identifying  potential leaks during user seal checks and a break‐
in period of the mask adjusting to the users face. This effect is
less  clear for the other two mask models, as the user was unable
to perform a satisfactory user seal check in any  test.   Filtra‐
tion  testing  methods and results The filtration tests were per‐
formed with a TSI Inc. Automated Filter Tester 8130A using 0.26 m
(mass mean diameter) NaCl as the aerosol source under a flow rate
of 85 L/min. With this system we were able to determine the  fil‐
tration  efficiency  for  the  challenge aerosol and the pressure
drop across the mask. For these measurements we report  the  ini‐
tial filtration efficiency as opposed to the minimum loaded effi‐
ciency, as we do not expect a significant difference in the load‐
ing  curves  for  treated vs untreated masks.  For our filtration
testing protocol we included one of each mask type in the control
group  and  two  of  each  type in the test group. The test group
masks were each put through five PLOS ONE A  scalable  method  of
applying humid heat for decontamination of N95 respirators during
the COVID‐19 crisis pressure drop shown for the test group  masks
is an average of the two masks of each type tested. Variation be‐
tween the two samples was minimal. Testing performed with  a  TSI
Inc.  Automated  Filter  Tester 8130A.  Mask Type Control Group 5
Cycles at 85C + 60‐85% Humidity Filtration Efficiency  (%)  Pres‐
sure  Drop (Pa) Filtration Efficiency (%) Pressure Drop (Pa) Chen
Heng V9501 KN95 HKYQ N95 heating cycles, while the control  group
was  not heated. After the five cycles the masks were all For all
four mask types studied, there was no  significant  drop  between
the  control group and the test group masks. Additionally, all of
the masks demonstrated a  filtration  efficiency  above  the  95%
threshold  for  N95 respirators. The test group mask results were
averaged together, but there were also no individual  masks  that
showed  an  efficiency  below  the 95% standard. One mask of each
type was also run through a 30 minute loading  test  to  simulate
the  test, the minimum efficiency for all masks remained over the
95% standard. While the pressure drop for each mask changed by up
to 20%, all masks were still well below the maximum resistance to
airflow specified by NIOSH ([23] 42 CFR 84.180).   With  a  total
cycle  time of about 50 minutes, including 10 minutes for loading
and unloading the oven, a 3.7 cu ft oven, as was used  here,  can
treat  approximately 1,300 masks per 24 hours under constant pro‐
cessing conditions. Larger convection ovens  are  available.  The
equipment needed to implement this method requires the convection
oven, containers, paper towels, and a pipette.  For  verification
and  validation, a few low cost sensors are used. This makes such
a method accessible to all scales of health  services.   Although
the original ink labeling on the masks blurred, the labels we ap‐
plied to the masks and containers with sharpie were  still  clear
after  the five cycles. This suggests a clear method for ensuring
that each mask is always returned to the same user. This will  be
important  in  healthcare settings both for maintaining good fit,
and because this decontamination protocol may not  sterilize  all
potential pathogens on the masks at the temperature chosen. Addi‐
tionally, the ability to label closed containers could both  help
to  protect  workers  who process masks through a decontamination
protocol, and to prevent cross contamination of masks during  the
process.   This  research  studied  the  effect of five cycles of
heating to 85C for 30 min with a relative humidity of 60‐85% on a
selection of N95 FFRs. We found that for all of the N95 models we
investigated there was no significant  difference  in  filtration
efficacy  between the test groups of masks and the untreated con‐
trol masks. For the 3M 1860 and 3M 8210 Plus, there was  no  mea‐
surable  degradation of fit after each decontamination cycle, nor
relative to the control group PLOS ONE A scalable method  of  ap‐
plying  humid  heat for decontamination of N95 respirators during
the COVID‐19 crisis KN95 and HKYQ N95 showed  no  degradation  in
the  filtration tests, but their fit factor value was in the 4‐45
and 5‐28 ranges respectively (where 100  is  normally  considered
passing).  Further work is still required to ensure viral inacti‐
vation of SARS‐CoV‐2 on FFRs under the given  We  would  like  to
thank  Robert Gustafson for useful discussions and the suggestion
of using rigid polypropylene containers.  Investigation: Loc  An‐
deregg,  Cole  Meisenhelder, Chiu Oan Ngooi, Lei Liao, Wang Xiao.
Supervision: Steven Chu, Yi Cui, John  M.  Doyle.   National  Re‐
search  Council.  Rapid Expert Consultation on the Possibility of
Bioaerosol Spread of SARS‐CoV‐2 for the COVID‐19 Pandemic.  2020;
van  Doremalen  N, Bushmaker T, Morris DH, Holbrook MG, Gamble A,
Williamson BN, et al. Aerosol Centers  for  Disease  Control  and
Prevention. Decontamination and Reuse of Filtering Facepiece Res‐
pirators. 2020;.  N95DECON. Technical Report  for  Heat‐Humidity‐
Based  N95 Reuse Risk Management. 2020;.  Viscusi DJ, Bergman MS,
Eimer BC, Shaffer RE. Evaluation of Five Decontamination  Methods
for  Filtering  Facepiece Respirators. The Annals of Occupational
Hygiene. 2009; 53(8):815827.  Lin TH, Chen CC, Huang SH, Kuo  CW,
Lai  CY,  Lin  WY.  Filter quality of electret masks in filtering
14.6 Fischer R, Morris DH, van Doremalen N, Sarchette  S,  Matson
J,  Bushmaker T, et al. Assessment of N95 respirator decontamina‐
tion and re‐use for SARS‐CoV‐2. medRxiv. 2020; Lore MB,  Heimbuch
BK,  Brown TL, Wander JD, Hinrichs SH. Effectiveness of Three De‐
contamination Treatments against Influenza Virus Applied to  Fil‐
tering Facepiece Respirators. The Annals of Occupational Hygiene.
2011; 56(1):92101.  McDevitt J, Rudnick S, First M,  Spengler  J.
Role  of  Absolute Humidity in the Inactivation of Influenza Chin
AWH, Chu JTS, Perera MRA, Hui KPY, Yen HL, Chan MCW, et al.  Sta‐
bility  of  SARS‐CoV‐2 in different environmental conditions. The
Lancet Microbe. 2020; Rabenau HF, Cinatl J, Morgenstern B,  Bauer
G, Preiser W, Doerr HW. Stability and inactivation of SARS coron‐
avirus. Medical Microbiology and Immunology.  2004;  194(1‐2):16.
Darnell  MER,  Taylor  DR. Evaluation of inactivation methods for
severe acute respiratory syndrome Bergman MS, Viscusi  DJ,  Heim‐
buch BK, Wander DJD, Sambol AR, Shaffer DRE. Evaluation of Multi‐
ple Fibers and Fabrics. 2010; 5(4):155892501000500405.  3M.  Dis‐
infection  of  Front Facing Respirators. 2020;.  PLOS ONE A scal‐
able method of applying humid heat  for  decontamination  of  N95
respirators during the COVID‐19 crisis Liao L, Xiao W, Zhao M, Yu
X, Wang H, Wang Q, et al. Can N95  respirators  be  reused  after
disinfection? And for how many times? 2020; FDA. Enforcement Pol‐
icy for Face Masks and Respirators During the Coronavirus Disease
(COVID‐19)  Public  Health Emergency. 2020;.  Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention. Release of Stockpiled N95 Filtering Face‐
piece  Respirators Beyond the Manufacturer‐Designated Shelf Life:
Considerations for the COVID‐19 Response. 2020;.  NIOSH. Code  of
Federal  Regulations  (42  CFR 84.180); Airflow resistance tests.
2020;.






























