Laboratory diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2: available approaches and limitations
J. M. Abduljalil
The ongoing pandemic of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is one of the most devastating outbreaks
witnessed in the last 100 years. The outbreak started in China and spread rapidly to almost every country, culminating in woefully
overwhelmed health-care systems in most countries. The only approved diagnostic test to accompany radiographic evaluation is reverse
transcription PCR. However, the applicability of this test in diagnosis and surveillance is challenged by a global shortage of reagents and
the lack of well-equipped laboratories with specialized staff in several low- and middle-income countries. Loop-mediated isothermal
ampliﬁcation and CRISPR-based diagnostic assays have developed and expected to play a role however, their accuracy is still inferior to
the recommended PCR approach. The need for the development of accurate and rapid diagnostic assays became apparent.
Immunodiagnostic tests and other molecular approaches were developed and tested. Other recently developed point-of-care molecular
tests are expected to be helpful in pandemic management as no particular skills are required from the operator. Fortunately, a number
chemiluminescence platforms or lateral ﬂow cassettes.
Keywords: Antigen, Coronavirus disease 2019, Isothermal ampliﬁcation, Nasopharyngeal swab, Real-time RT-PCR, Serology
Medically important coronaviruses were identiﬁed from the
nasal secretions of patients with mild colds for the ﬁrst time in
the 1960s. Generally, coronaviruses are spherical (80–160 nm),
pleomorphic, enveloped, single-stranded, positive-sense RNA
viruses [1]. Their helical nucleocapsid surrounds a nonsegmented genome (27–32 kb) characterized by a 5ʹ-end
containing genes important for viral replication and pathogenesis in the host cell [2]. The 3ʹ-end genomic region harbours
genes for nucleocapsid and membrane proteins [3]. In 2003, the
animal coronavirus severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus (SARS-CoV) was described; it crossed the species
barrier and resulted in the epidemic of severe acute respiratory
syndrome (SARS) in China and nearby countries. Middle East
respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) was described
in 2012, when an outbreak took place in the Middle East of a
similar disease called Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS)
[4]. A third animal coronavirus to be described, severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), originated
from the Chinese city of Wuhan and led to the ongoing
pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) [5]. SARSCoV-2 seems to have spilled over from the bat population
through an intermediate host (most likely the pangolin) [6].
Since the ofﬁcial announcement of this novel coronavirus
(known then as 2019-nCoV) in China in December 2019, the
global conﬁrmed cases had reached 6 663 304 in more than 190
countries and territories with a total of 392 802 deaths as of 6
June 2020 (10:00 CEST) [7]. Similar to SARS-CoV and MERSCoV, infections of SARS-CoV-2 predominate in adults and
men without a conﬁrmed underlying cause [8]. The majority of
New Microbe and New Infect 2020; 36: 100713
New Microbes and New Infections, Volume 36 Number C,
SARS-CoV-2 infections are subclinical, whereas symptomatic
patients usually present with cough, fever, fatigue and groundglass appearance of lungs on radiographic imaging [9]. Admission to intensive care units is common because of the bad
prognosis in individuals with co-morbidities and in the elderly
population [10,11]. The clinical management of SARS-CoV-2
The laboratory-based approach to the diagnosis of SARSCoV-2 is real-time reverse transcription PCR (rRT-PCR)
approved by the WHO and by the US CDC. Due to the
pandemic situation, testing laboratories were overwhelmed and
shortage of reagents became a global issue. The introduction of
accurate serological tests will undoubtedly facilitate pandemic
management, in addition to reducing time, costs and workloads
in national laboratories and health-care systems. For accurate
diagnosis, rRT-PCR should be accompanied by computed tomography (CT) radioimaging [14]. Indeed, patients were found
to develop ground-glass appearance on chest CT before the
successful detection of viral RNA. Generally, rRT-PCR results
turn positive 4–6 days after lung manifestations become
apparent on radiographs [15].
Next-generation sequencing and microarray analyses are not
currently applied for diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2; however, these
techniques are important research tools for the scrutiny of
provide a concise view of the currently known diagnostic tests
for SARS-CoV-2. Laboratory staff should be aware of the
importance of continually consulting up-to-date laboratory
for infectious diseases as information becomes available or
more accurate data are obtained regarding the disease and
Considerations before laboratory testing
As of 12 May 2020, the WHO deﬁnes a suspected case as ‘A
patient with any acute respiratory illness and having been in
contact with a conﬁrmed or probable COVID-19 case in the
last 14 days before symptom onset’ [17]. However, this deﬁnition is not valid in countries where SARS-CoV-2 is spreading
widely in a community transmission pattern. In such communities, acquiring the infection may occur by contact with
asymptomatic untested cases. Hence, an individual with relevant clinical manifestations not fully explained by other aetiology should be considered as a suspected case [12].
Diagnosis of suspected and asymptomatic cases is of paramount importance in the management and control of outbreaks. When testing is not possible, specimens should be
shipped, according to WHO instructions, to the nearest
reference laboratory [18]. It should be noted that a negative
result does not rule out the infection and the tested person may
be still in the ﬁrst days of infection when viral RNA load in
caution and follow-up testing are recommended for highly
suspected individuals. It should be noted that most SARS-CoV-2
tests are currently approved to be implemented only under the
current emergency situation and manufacturer-independent
evaluation for test performance is mostly lacking. In other
words, clinical correlation with patient history and radiographic
imaging is necessary to determine the correct infection status.
Diagnostic specimens: types and times
For general procedures for specimen collection, interim guides
from the WHO and CDC are the best to consult [18,19].
Notably, different respiratory specimens (from upper and
lower parts of the tract) were found to have different detection
rates of SARS-CoV-2. Indeed, variations occur between patients and even in the same individual during the course of the
illness; the pattern of viral shedding is not fully understood
[20–22]. For instance, nasopharyngeal specimens have shown
negative results, while viral RNA was detected in sputum
specimens from the same patients [23]. Additionally, the accuracy of the test depends on specimen quality and quantity,
time of collection during the course of the disease, and the
inherent quality of the test kit [15].
Swab specimens are not possible from bedridden patients
with severe respiratory involvement or those undergoing mechanical ventilation. Invasive procedures to obtain endotracheal
aspirates, sputum and bronchial lavage are possible ways to
obtain specimens from such patients. Throat swabs were found
to result in false-negative results as viral RNA was recovered
from sputum samples of patients after viral load in the throat
illness progresses, lower respiratory tract specimens become
the best choice [22,26]. However, collection of specimens from
the lower respiratory tract may increase infection risk to
health-care workers owing to aerosol generation during
collection procedures [27]. Saliva and nasal wash specimens
have been found to be good alternatives, especially when laboratory biosafety measures cannot be met [28–30]. Stool and
blood specimens were found to contain SARS-CoV-2 and viral
RNA has been successfully detected from such specimens by
RT-PCR; however, their diagnostic value has not been studied
thoroughly [31]. Lastly, minimum essential medium, sterile
phosphate buffer, and 0.9% saline solutions were all found to be
alternatives to viral transport media [32].
Specimen processing
Upon receiving the specimen, immediate testing procedures
should be performed in a biosafety cabinet of class II or higher.
Care should be paid to minimizing aerosol generation during
specimen manipulation. In addition to biosafety precautions, the
testing operator should be aware of technical factors affecting
result accuracy [33]. For nucleic acid ampliﬁcation assays, the
processing kit reagents should be the recommended match
with the PCR platform to be used [33]. Moreover, reagent
preparation and storage should be in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions. For RNA extraction phase, various
bioMérieux) have been validated by the CDC to work properly
when manufacturer’s instructions are followed strictly [33].
Specimens should quickly be diluted in lysis buffer containing
an inactivating agent (guanidinium-based compounds to inactivate virions) and non-denaturing detergent to disrupt the lipid
envelopes of respiratory epithelial cells and the virus. Additionally, lysis buffer also prevents viral RNA degradation [34].
When self-enclosed automated systems are used, success of
this step is optimally guaranteed. The currently used systems
are ID NOW™ (Abbott, Abbott Park, IL, USA), Cobas Liat®
(Roche Molecular Systems, Basel, Switzerland) and GeneXpert® (Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). Extracted RNA
should be stored at or below –70°C if subsequent steps of
analysis are to be performed later.
Detection of SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid
There are two available categories for RNA ampliﬁcation tests
for SARS-CoV-2; rRT-PCR and loop-mediated isothermal
ampliﬁcation (LAMP). For SARS-CoV-2 detection, protocols of
rRT-PCR were approved by WHO and the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), whereas the isothermal ampliﬁcation
infections, RT-PCR is the most common tool due to its accuracy and popularity [35]. Additionally, less common ampliﬁcation assays other than PCR are also used in the detection of
RNA viruses. Nonetheless, the accuracy of nucleic acid ampliﬁcation tests is ultimately affected by mutations in the sequences targeted by test primers [36].
Real-time RT-PCR
Different qualitative rRT-PCR protocols for SARS-CoV-2
Laboratory diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2
[33,34,37–39]. Two diagnostic rRT-PCR-based assays are
accepted for procurement under Emergency Use Listing procedure; Genesig Real-Time PCR Coronavirus (Primerdesign
Ltd, Southampton, UK) and Cobas SARS-CoV-2 6800/8800
system (Roche Molecular Systems). The Cobas 6800 SARSCoV-2 system from Roche was recently evaluated by Rocheindependent researchers and found to be reliable for detecting SARS-CoV-2 RNA in nasopharyngeal specimens [40].
The ﬁrst rRT-PCR protocol developed outside China
incorporated primers targeting genes of the envelope protein
(E), nucleocapsid (N) and RNA polymerase (RdRp) [39]. The
primers of E and RdRp were the most sensitive and were
rapidly and widely adopted in Europe [41]. However, RdRp
primers were found to cross-react with RNA of SARS-CoV
[42]. A point worth mentioning is that reagent design has the
most inﬂuential role on assay performance, therefore, welloptimized targets are expected to arise from different
genomic sequences of SARS-CoV-2.
Currently, numerous primers are designed to target various
RNA sequences in six genes of SARS-CoV-2 for diagnostic
purposes: ORF1a/b, ORF1b-nsp14 (50 -UTR), RdRp (RNAdependent RNA polymerase), S (spike protein), E (envelope),
N1/N2/N3 (nucleocapsid) and RdRp/Hel (RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase/helicase). Of note, a recent study found nucleocapsid N2 and envelope E genes to be the most sensitive singleplex reactions and no signiﬁcant change in cycle threshold
(Ct) was noted when both assays were combined [43]. The
recommended rRT-PCR diagnostic panel by CDC includes
primers for (i) two speciﬁc regions of SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid (N) gene and (ii) human RNase P gene (RP) in a one-step
qualitative RT-PCR-based detection [33].
Real-time RT-PCR tests have been positive in convalescent
patients after earlier negative RT-PCR tests performed in the
same laboratory with the same testing kit and same technician
[44–47]. False results in rRT-PCR may be attributed to various
factors. Variations in viral load kinetics may lead to collecting
specimens with less viral load resulting in false-negative results.
False-negative results for RT-PCR were also reported in cases of
typical CT ﬁndings of SARS-CoV-2 infection [48,49]. Indeed,
some researchers found the sensitivity of rRT-PCR to be around
70% in SARS-CoV-2 diagnosis [49]. Additionally, studies have
indicated that the SARS-CoV-2 genome is undergoing an evolutionary process through mutations and active genetic recombination [50,51]. This observation is expected because RNA viruses
lack efﬁcient proofreading machinery to ensure ﬁdelity of RNA
replication [52]. Mutations in primer and probe targeted sequences may lead to false-negative results, but can be reduced by
targeting two or three sequences within the viral genome.
New Microbes and New Infections, Volume 36 Number C,
FIG. 1. Principle of reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal ampliﬁcation (RT-LAMP). B2 backwards inner primer (BIP) anneals to the target
RNA forming a start point for reverse transcriptase to synthesize a complementary DNA strand (cDNA) (1). The outer primer B3 anneals to a
sequence outside that of B2 to initiate synthesis of a new cDNA (2). During synthesis of the second cDNA, the former strand is displaced by the
reverse transcriptase (3). The displaced strand is released with a loop at the 50 end. Forward inner primer F2 anneals to the 30 end of the newly
released cDNA strand and DNA polymerase starts synthesis of a complementary DNA strand (4). Forwards outer primer F3 anneals to the 30 end of
the strand formed by the F2 primer and DNA polymerase initiates the synthesis of new strand and simultaneous displacing of the former (5). The
recently displaced cDNA strand contains complementary sequences at both ends, hence it forms a dumbbell-shaped structure (6). This structure is the
starting material for loop-mediated ampliﬁcation cycles. It contains multiple sites for ampliﬁcation initiation and is rapidly converted to stem-loop DNA
structures in response to self-primed synthesis at the 30 end (7). At the same time, backwards inner primer B2 to the single-stranded loop region to
start DNA synthesis culminating in long concatemers (8 and 9). Further synthesis leads to dumbbell-shaped structures and accumulation of ampliﬁcation dsDNA products (10).
Isothermal ampliﬁcation assays
Loop-mediated isothermal ampliﬁcation is based on the technology of autocycling strand displacement DNA synthesis via
special DNA polymerase (Bst) (Fig. 1). In such tests, the positive
reaction is detected visually or by simple turbidity measurement [53]. Incorporation of ﬂuorescent intercalating dyes to
these tests is possible, allowing for real-time monitoring of the
reaction [54]. The technique was further developed to enable
RNA detection by reverse transcription with successful application in detection of numerous RNA viruses including H7N9
inﬂuenza virus, MERS-CoV, West Nile virus and Zika virus
the WHO or FDA to be performed even under emergency
situations. Successful application of real-time LAMP tests in the
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic will positively contribute to pandemic
management because this test is rapid (results are available in
less than 1 hour) and can be performed using a small instrument
at general laboratories in hospitals, at bedsides or in the ﬁeld.
Nonetheless, primer designing for LAMP tests is more difﬁcult
than in PCR assays.
A handful of studies have developed, optimized and tested
RT-LAMP assays for the diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 using
primers for different genes [59–64]. Park et al. found primers
of the nucleocapsid gene to be the most sensitive, detecting as
low as 100 RNA copy/reaction [60]. This level of detection is
still considered high for sensitive diagnosis of suspected cases.
Indeed, the primer sets of another study targeting Orﬂ1ab and
S genes achieved a detection level as low as 20 copies/reaction
[59]. Moreover, high sensitivity and speciﬁcity of RT-LAMP
were also found comparable to that of PCR [60].
Next-generation assays
Applications of CRISPR-Cas technology in diagnostic microbiology and biomedicine is growing rapidly [65]. Within the past 2
years, researchers invented new diagnostic sensitive assays
based on the CRISPR-Cas system for detection of infectious
agents with minimal or no equipment to perform the tests [66].
In April 2020, American scientists developed an RT-LAMPbased CRISPR-Cas assay on lateral ﬂow strips to detect the
RNA of SARS-CoV-2 in extracts from nasopharyngeal specimens [67]. The assay is performed by dipping the test strip into
the RNA extract solution of the treated specimen and after 40
minutes the results are visually read. The Cas12, protein
component of CRISPR-Cas, is guided by specially designed
associated RNA (gRNA) to base-pair with a speciﬁc RNA
sequence of SARS-CoV-2. When the Cas12–gRNA complex
recognizes the targeted sequence, a labelled single-stranded
DNA reporter probe is cleaved by Cas12 to liberate a ﬂuorescent molecule visible to naked eye. However, its current
sensitivity is lower than of rRT-PCR. As in nucleic acid ampliﬁcation assays, CRISPR-based diagnostics are also expected to
generate false results if mutations have occurred in the targeted
Immunodiagnostic approaches
Immunodiagnostic point-of-care tests generating rapid results
(in less than 1 hour) are less complex than molecular tests.
Based on current evidence, seroconversion for SARS-CoV-2
was found to occurs between 7 and 11 days after onset of
symptoms [68]. Consequently, antibody detection assays
might be impractical for diagnosis of acute (current) infection
at the early stage. Nonetheless, these tests may be useful in
epidemiological surveillance (retrospective evaluation), contact tracing and research studies addressing neutralizing
the FDA [69]. Six of these tests are to be performed only in
Laboratory diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2
laboratories certiﬁed to perform high complexity tests,
whereas the remaining panel can be performed in laboratories
with requirement of moderate complexity tests. Antibody
detecting tests are either run on ELISA, chemiluminescence
(Cobas analysers platforms) or rapid-test lateral ﬂow cassettes. On the other hand, a single lateral ﬂow cassette (Soﬁa 2
SARS antigen FIA® from Quidel, San Diego, CA, USA) was
nasopharyngeal and nasal swabs. Other antibody-detecting
tests exploit recombinant nucleocapsid antigens to detect/
quantify anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies in blood. However,
dozens have been developed and introduced to markets with
limited independent validation.
Due to high nucleotide sequence similarity with SARS-CoV,
cross-reactivity is expected in such tests and their sensitivity is
expected to range from 34% to 80% [70–72]. Some lateral ﬂow
rapid test kits have the capacity to detect IgM and IgG or viral
and past SARS-CoV-2 infections. Theoretically, such assays will
decrease the time, costs and labour of testing in comparison to
nucleic acid ampliﬁcation assays. The majority of available
immunodiagnostic tests are based on the principle of immunochromatography (i.e. lateral ﬂow) (Fig. 2). However, sampling
variations and variations between individuals in terms of viral
load are important factors affecting the accuracy of such assays
Antigen detection tests
Rapid antigen detection kits are generally characterized by
suboptimal sensitivity and speciﬁcity [73]. Nonetheless, unique
and conserved domains of proteins in SARS-CoV-2 could be
exploited to develop sensitive testing kits. Two approaches are
expected to increase the sensitivity of such tests: (i) prior
treatment to concentrate the targeted antigen and (ii) use of
monoclonal antibodies to different epitopes of the antigen to be
detected. Two recent pre-print studies reported a sensitivity
range of 93%–100% and 100% speciﬁcity of the immunochromatography SARS-CoV-2 antigen tests targeting N protein
[74,75] (accessed 13 May 2020).
Serological tests
against SARS-CoV-2 [69]. Such tests are mostly based on the
principles of immunochromatography, chemiluminescence or
ELISA to detect IgG or IgG and IgM in serum. Serodiagnosis is
believed to be useful in convalescent patients with negative PCR
ﬁndings, as the accuracy of molecular assays is inﬂuenced by
New Microbes and New Infections, Volume 36 Number C,
FIG. 2. Principle of immunochromatography. This drawing shows lateral ﬂow to
detect an antigen. The specimen containing the antigen (Analyte) is placed on
the sample pad. The antigen, with the
ﬂuid, moves to the conjugate pad where it
is bound by a labelled antibody speciﬁc to
the targeted antigen. The conjugate pad
also contains labelled antibodies nonspeciﬁc to the antigen to be detected.
through the nitrocellulose membrane and
reach the ‘Test line’ area. In this area,
antigen-speciﬁc antibodies are immobilized to catch the antigen–antibody
complexes accumulate in this area, the
line becomes visible to the naked eye.
The non-speciﬁc antibodies also migrate
and pass the ‘Test line’ to reach the
‘Control line’ area and that line also becomes visible. The test is considered
positive only when the two lines (T and
C) are visible. (Reproduced from Paulini
et al. [82]).
viral shedding dynamics [20]. However, cross-reactivity with
other antibodies is a major challenge to serological tests. In fact,
the proﬁle of the humoral immune response to SARS-CoV-2 is
still partially unknown [76,77]. From the second week of
assays. In the third week after onset of symptoms, the IgM titre
peaks and then gradually decreases whereas IgG stabilises
around 4 weeks [68,77,78]. It should be noted that interference
from other antibodies, mounted against other phylogenetically
related viruses, is to be evaluated.
With the exception of immunodeﬁcient individuals, infections of SARS-CoV-2 result in cell-mediated immunity
and humoral responses by IgM, IgA and IgG uniformly in all
patients. IgM is usually the ﬁrst class to be produced within
the ﬁrst week of onset followed by robust IgG immunity
[77]. IgM and IgG against SARS-CoV-2 were detected by
quantitative ELISA and qualitative immunochromatography
assays with an increase in detection rates as the course of
the illness progressed [79,80]. However, a recent study (of
a small sample size and still as a preprint) from Oxford
accurate than lateral ﬂow strips with high sensitivity for IgG
from day 10 after onset [81]. Another immunodiagnostic
test for quantitative measurement of interleukin-6 (Elecsys
IL-6 from Roche Diagnostics) has also been granted an
helpful in determining the risk of intubation with mechanical
ventilation as it measures the level of inﬂammatory
response in individuals with SARS-CoV-2.
The choice of specimen type for SARS-CoV-2 diagnosis is subject
to patient condition and stage of the disease course. Specimens
from upper respiratory tract are the best choice during the early
days of the illness, wheras sputum is the most sensitive at later
stages. Owing to occasional false results with rRT-PCR, CT
radiography should be obtained to reach an accurate diagnosis
and for proper management. As in other RNA viruses, mutations
and other genetic changes are likely to occur, which may result in
pitfalls of nucleic acid ampliﬁcation assays. Genomic homology of
SARS-CoV-2 with other coronaviruses is also a challenge to
serological and antigen detection tests. However, improvements
in such point-of-care tests are expected to aid in better management of the pandemic as they are rapid and simple to
perform. Epidemiological studies will be easily conducted once
accurate serological tests become available.
This work is a personal effort and did not receive any speciﬁc
Conﬂict of interest
conﬂict of interest.
[1] Saif LJ, Wang Q, Vlasova AN, Jung K, Xiao S. Coronaviruses. In:
Zimmerman JJ, Karriker LA, Ramirez A, Schwartz KJ, Stevenson GW,
Sons, Ltd; 2019. p. 488–523.
[2] Yoshimoto FK. The proteins of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus-2 (SARS CoV-2 or n-COV19), the cause of COVID-19.
Protein J 2020;39:198–216.
[3] Wu A, Peng Y, Huang B, Ding X, Wang X, Niu P, et al. Genome
composition and divergence of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV)
originating in China. Cell Host Microbe 2020;27:325–8.
[4] de Wit E, van Doremalen N, Falzarano D, Munster VJ. SARS and MERS:
[5] Zhu N, Zhang D, Wang W, Li X, Yang B, Song J, et al. A novel
coronavirus from patients with pneumonia in China, 2019. N Engl J
[6] Zhang T, Wu Q, Zhang Z. Probable pangolin origin of SARS-CoV-2
associated with the COVID-19 outbreak. Curr Biol 2020;30:1346–51.
[8] Del Rio C, Malani PN. COVID-19-new insights on a rapidly changing
epidemic. JAMA 2020;323:1339–40.
[9] Abduljalil JM, Abduljalil BM. Epidemiology, genome, and clinical features of the pandemic SARS-CoV-2: a recent view. New Microbe. New
[10] Wu Z, McGoogan JM. Characteristics of and important lessons from
the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak in China: summary of a report of 72 314 cases from the Chinese Center for Disease
Control and Prevention. JAMA 2020;323:1239–42.
[11] Paules CI, Marston HD, Fauci AS. Coronavirus infections—more than
just the common cold. JAMA 2020;323:707–8.
[12] World Health Organization. Clinical management of COVID-19.
Geneva: WHO; 2020.
[13] World Health Organization. Clinical management of severe acute
respiratory infection when COVID-19 is suspected (v1.2). Geneva:
WHO; 2020. p. 1–21.
Laboratory diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2
[14] Wang Y, Kang H, Liu X, Tong Z. Combination of RT-qPCR testing and
clinical features for diagnosis of COVID-19 facilitates management of
SARS-CoV-2 outbreak. J Med Virol 2020;92:538–9.
[15] Ai T, Yang Z, Hou H, Zhan C, Chen C, Lv W, et al. Correlation of
[16] Li B, Si H-R, Zhu Y, Yang X-L, Anderson DE, Shi Z-L, et al. Discovery
of bat coronaviruses through surveillance and probe capture-based
[17] World Health Organization. Global surveillance for COVID-19 caused
by human infection with COVID-19 virus. Geneva: WHO; 2020.
who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/technicalguidance. [Accessed 25 April 2020].
[19] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Clinical specimens: novel
2019-ncov/lab/guidelines-clinical-specimens.html. [Accessed 27 April
[20] He X, Lau EHY, Wu P, Deng X, Wang J, Hao X, et al. Temporal dynamics in viral shedding and transmissibility of COVID-19. Nat Med
[21] Liu Y, Yan LM, Wan L, Xiang TX, Le A, Liu JM, et al. Viral dynamics in
mild and severe cases of COVID-19. Lancet Infect Dis 2020:1–2.
[22] Zou L, Ruan F, Huang M, Liang L, Huang H, Hong Z, et al. SARS-CoV-2
viral load in upper respiratory specimens of infected patients. N Engl J
[23] Winichakoon P, Chaiwarith R, Liwsrisakun C, Salee P, Goonna A,
Limsukon A, et al. Negative nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs
do not rule out COVID-19. J Clin Microbiol 2020;58:1–2.
[24] World Health Organization. Report of the WHO-China joint mission
on coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Geneva: WHO; 2020.
[25] Joynt GM, Wu WK. Understanding COVID-19: what does viral RNA
[26] Pan Y, Zhang D, Yang P, Poon LLM, Wang Q. Viral load of SARS-CoV2 in clinical samples. Lancet Infect Dis 2020;20:411–2.
[27] Tran K, Cimon K, Severn M, Pessoa-Silva CL, Conly J. Aerosol
generating procedures and risk of transmission of acute respiratory
[28] Azzi L, Carcano G, Gianfagna F, Grossi P, Gasperina DD, Genoni A,
et al. Saliva is a reliable tool to detect SARS-CoV-2. J Infect 2020.
[29] Tang Y-W, Schmitz JE, Persing DH, Stratton CW. The laboratory
diagnosis of COVID-19 infection: current issues and challenges. J Clin
[30] To KK-W, Tsang OT-Y, Yip CC-Y, Chan K-H, Wu T-C, Chan JM-C,
et al. Consistent detection of 2019 novel coronavirus in saliva. Clin
[31] Yeo C, Kaushal S, Yeo D. Enteric involvement of coronaviruses: is
faecal–oral transmission of SARS-CoV-2 possible? Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol 2020;5:335–7.
[32] Rodino KG, Espy MJ, Buckwalter SP, Walchak RC, Germer JJ,
Fernholz E, et al. Evaluation of saline, phosphate buffered saline and
minimum essential medium as potential alternatives to viral transport
[33] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC real-time RT-PCR
diagnostic panel. Atlanta, GA: CDC; 2020.
New Microbes and New Infections, Volume 36 Number C,
[34] Chu DKW, Pan Y, Cheng SMS, Hui KPY, Krishnan P, Liu Y, et al.
Molecular diagnosis of a novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) causing an
outbreak of pneumonia. Clin Chem 2020;66:549–55.
[35] Grifﬁn DW, Gibson CJ, Lipp EK, Riley K, Paul JH, Rose JB. Detection
of viral pathogens by reverse transcriptase PCR and of microbial indicators by standard methods in the canals of the Florida Keys. Appl
Environ Microbiol 1999;65:4118–25.
[36] Bustin SA, Nolan T. Pitfalls of quantitative real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction. J Biomol Tech 2004;15:155–66.
[37] Nao N, Shirato K, Katano H, Matsuyama S, Takeda M. Detection of
second case of 2019-nCoV infection in Japan. 2020. Tokyo.
[38] Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Emergency
response technical centre. Laboratory testing for COVID-19. Beijing:
Chinese CDC; 2020.
[39] Corman VM, Landt O, Kaiser M, Molenkamp R, Meijer A, Chu DKW,
et al. Detection of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) by real-time
[40] Poljak M, Korva M, Knap Gasper N, Fujs Komlos K, Sagadin M, Ursic T,
et al. Clinical evaluation of the cobas SARS-CoV-2 test and a diagnostic
platform switch during 48 hours in the midst of the COVID-19
[41] Reusken CBEM, Broberg EK, Haagmans B, Meijer A, Corman VM,
Papa A, et al. Laboratory readiness and response for novel coronavirus
(2019-nCoV) in expert laboratories in 30 EU/EEA countries25.
[42] Chan JF-W, Yip CC-Y, To KK-W, Tang TH-C, Wong SC-Y,
Leung K-H, et al. Improved molecular diagnosis of COVID-19 by the
novel, highly sensitive and speciﬁc COVID-19-RdRp/Hel real-time
reverse transcription-PCR assay validated in vitro and with clinical
[43] Waggoner JJ, Stittleburg V, Pond R, Saklawi Y, Sahoo MK, Babiker A,
et al. Triplex real-time RT-PCR for severe acute respiratory syndrome
[44] Xing Y, Mo P, Xiao Y, Zhao O, Zhang Y, Wang F. Post-discharge
surveillance and positive virus detection in two medical staff recovered
from coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), China, January to
[45] Lan L, Xu D, Ye G, Xia C, Wang S, Li Y, et al. Positive RT-PCR test
results in patients recovered from COVID-19. JAMA 2020;323:
[46] Chen D, Xu W, Lei Z, Huang Z, Liu J, Gao Z, et al. Recurrence of
positive SARS-CoV-2 RNA in COVID-19: a case report. Int J Infect Dis
[47] Zhang J, Yan K, Ye H, Lin J, Zheng J, Cai T. SARS-CoV-2 turned
positive in a discharged patient with COVID-19 arouses concern
regarding the present standard for discharge. Int J Infect Dis 2020.
[48] Wong HYF, Lam HYS, Fong AH-T, Leung ST, Chin TW-Y, Lo CSY,
et al. Frequency and distribution of chest radiographic ﬁndings in
[49] Fang Y, Zhang H, Xie J, Lin M, Ying L, Pang P, et al. Sensitivity of chest
CT for COVID-19: comparison to RT-PCR. Radiology 2020:200432.
[50] Sun J, He W-T, Wang L, Lai A, Ji X, Zhai X, et al. COVID-19:
epidemiology, evolution, and cross-disciplinary perspectives. Trends
Mol Med 2020;26:483–95.
[51] Phan T. Genetic diversity and evolution of SARS-CoV-2. Infect Genet
[52] Sanjuán R, Domingo-Calap P. Mechanisms of viral mutation. Cell Mol
Life Sci 2016;73:4433–48.
[53] Notomi T, Mori Y, Tomita N, Kanda H. Loop-mediated isothermal
ampliﬁcation (LAMP): principle, features, and future prospects.
J Microbiol 2015;53:1–5.
[54] Oscorbin IP, Belousova EA, Zakabunin AI, Boyarskikh UA,
Filipenko ML. Comparison of ﬂuorescent intercalating dyes for quantitative loop-mediated isothermal ampliﬁcation (qLAMP). Biotechniques 2016;61:20–5.
[55] Huang P, Wang H, Cao Z, Jin H, Chi H, Zhao J, et al. A rapid and
speciﬁc assay for the detection of MERS-CoV. Front Microbiol 2018;9:
[56] Chotiwan N, Brewster CD, Magalhaes T, Weger-Lucarelli J,
Duggal NK, Rückert C, et al. Rapid and speciﬁc detection of Asian- and
[57] Cao Z, Wang H, Wang L, Li L, Jin H, Xu C, et al. Visual detection of
West Nile Virus using reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal
ampliﬁcation combined with a vertical ﬂow visualization strip. Front
[58] Ge Y, Wu B, Qi X, Zhao K, Guo X, Zhu Y, et al. Rapid and sensitive
detection of novel avian-origin inﬂuenza a (H7N9) virus by reverse
transcription loop-mediated isothermal ampliﬁcation combined with a
lateral-ﬂow device. PLoS One 2013;8:e69941.
[59] Yan C, Cui J, Huang L, Du B, Chen L, Xue G, et al. Rapid and visual
detection of 2019 novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) by a reverse
transcription loop-mediated isothermal ampliﬁcation assay. Clin
1016/j.jmoldx.2020.03.006. in press.
[61] Lu R, Wu X, Wan Z, Li Y, Zuo L, Qin J, et al. Development of a novel
reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal ampliﬁcation method
[62] Baek YH, Um J, Antigua KJC, Park J-H, Kim Y, Oh S, et al. Development of a reverse transcription-loop-mediated isothermal ampliﬁcation as a rapid early-detection method for novel SARS-CoV-2. Emerg
Microbe. Infect 2020;9:998–1007.
[63] Yu L, Wu S, Hao X, Dong X, Mao L, Pelechano V, et al. Rapid detection
of COVID-19 coronavirus using a reverse transcriptional loopmediated isothermal ampliﬁcation (RT-LAMP) diagnostic platform.
[64] Lu R, Wu X, Wan Z, Li Y, Jin X, Zhang C. A Novel Reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal ampliﬁcation method for rapid
[65] Foss DV, Hochstrasser ML, Wilson RC. Clinical applications of
CRISPR-based genome editing and diagnostics. Transfusion 2019;59:
[66] Chiu C. Cutting-edge infectious disease diagnostics with CRISPR. Cell
Host Microbe 2018;23:702–4.
[67] Broughton JP, Deng X, Yu G, Fasching CL, Servellita V, Singh J, et al.
CRISPR–Cas12-based detection of SARS-CoV-2. Nat Biotechnol
[68] Long Q-X, Liu B-Z, Deng H-J, Wu G-C, Deng K, Chen Y-K, et al.
Antibody responses to SARS-CoV-2 in patients with COVID-19. Nat
[70] Bruning AHL, Leeﬂang MMG, Vos JMBW, Spijker R, de Jong MD,
Wolthers KC, et al. Rapid tests for inﬂuenza, respiratory syncytial
Döhla M, Boesecke C, Schulte B, Diegmann C, Sib E, Richter E, et al.
Rapid point-of-care testing for SARS-CoV-2 in a community screening
setting shows low sensitivity. Public Health 2020;182:170–2.
Li Z, Yi Y, Luo X, Xiong N, Liu Y, Li S, et al. Development and clinical
application of a rapid IgM-IgG combined antibody test for SARS-CoV-2
Merckx J, Wali R, Schiller I, Caya C, Gore GC, Chartrand C, et al.
Diagnostic accuracy of novel and traditional rapid tests for inﬂuenza
Porte L, Legarraga P, Vollrath V, Aguilera X, Munita JM, Araos R, et al.
Evaluation of novel antigen-based rapid detection test for the diagnosis
Diao B, Wen K, Chen J, Liu Y, Yuan Z, Han C, et al. Diagnosis of acute
Qin C, Zhou L, Hu Z, Zhang S, Yang S, Tao Y, et al. Dysregulation of
immune response in patients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China. Clin
Laboratory diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2
[77] Prompetchara E, Ketloy C, Palaga T. Immune responses in COVID-19
and potential vaccines: lessons learned from SARS and MERS epidemic.
[79] Jääskeläinen AJ, Kekäläinen E, Kallio-Kokko H, Mannonen L, Kortela E,
[80] Pan Y, Li X, Yang G, Fan J, Tang Y, Zhao J, et al. Serological immunochromatographic approach in diagnosis with SARS-CoV-2 infected
[81] Adams ER, Ainsworth M, Anand R, Andersson MI, Auckland K,
Baillie JK, et al. Antibody testing for COVID-19: a report from the
[82] Paulini I, Siqueira-Silva J, Thomaz L, Rocha L, Harsi C, Bellei N, et al.
Development of a prototype immunochromatographic test for rapid
diagnosis of respiratory adenovirus infection. Braz J Infect Dis 2017;21:
