Applied and Environmental Science Increasing Temperature and Rel‐
ative Humidity Accelerates Inactivation of SARS‐CoV‐2 on Surfaces
Security  Science and Technology Directorate, Fort Detrick, Mary‐
land, USA Censeo Consulting Group Inc., Washington, DC,  USA  AB‐
STRACT  Coronavirus  disease  2019 (COVID‐19) was rst identied in
China in late 2019 and is caused by newly identied  severe  acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS‐CoV‐2). Previous studies
had reported the stability of SARS‐CoV‐2 in  cell  culture  media
and  deposited onto surfaces under a limited set of environmental
conditions. Here, we broadly investigated the effects of relative
humidity, temperature, and droplet size on the stability of SARS‐
CoV‐2 in a simulated clinically relevant  matrix  dried  on  non‐
porous  surfaces.  The  results show that SARS‐CoV‐2 decayed more
rapidly when either humidity or  temperature  was  increased  but
that  droplet  volume  (1  to  50  l) and surface type (stainless
steel, plastic, or nitrile glove) did not signicantly impact  de‐
cay  rate. At room temperature (24C), virus half‐life ranged from
6.3 to 18.6 h depending on the relative humidity but was  reduced
to  1.0 to 8.9 h when the temperature was increased to 35C. These
ndings suggest that a potential for fomite transmission may  per‐
sist  for  hours to days in indoor environments and have implica‐
tions for assessment of the risk posed by  surface  contamination
in  indoor  environments.  IMPORTANCE Mitigating the transmission
of SARS‐CoV‐2 in clinical settings and public spaces is critical‐
ly  important to reduce the number of COVID‐19 cases while effec‐
tive vaccines and therapeutics are under development.  SARS‐CoV‐2
transmission is thought to primarily occur through direct person‐
to‐person transfer of infectious respiratory droplets or  through
aerosol‐generating medical procedures. However, contact with con‐
taminated surfaces may also play a signicant role. In  this  con‐
text,  understanding  the factors contributing to SARS‐CoV‐2 per‐
sistence on surfaces will enable a more  accurate  estimation  of
the  risk  of  contact transmission and inform mitigation strate‐
gies. To this end, we have developed a simple mathematical  model
that  can  be  used to estimate virus decay on nonporous surfaces
under a range of conditions and  which  may  be  utilized  opera‐
tionally  to  identify  indoor environments in which the virus is
most persistent.  KEYWORDS COVID‐19,  SARS‐CoV‐2,  contamination,
coronavirus,  fomite, half‐life, humidity, temperature, transmis‐
sion everal studies have reported the presence  of  severe  acute
respiratory  syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS‐CoV‐2) genetic material
on surfaces in coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‐19) patient  rooms
and  throughout hospital wards, indicating environmental contami‐
nation.  Commonly  contaminated  items  included  ofce  equipment
(e.g.,  mice,  keyboards,  printers) and metal furnishings (e.g.,
doorknobs, handrails) (15).  However, those studies did not eval‐
uate  the  presence  of  infectious virus on surfaces in Citation
Biryukov J, Boydston JA, Dunning RA, Yeager JJ, Wood S, Reese AL,
Ferris A, Miller D, Weaver W, Zeitouni NE, Phillips A, Freeburger
D, Hooper I, Ratnesar‐Shumate S, Yolitz J, Krause M, Williams  G,
Dawson  DG,  Herzog  A, Dabisch P, Wahl V, Hevey MC, Altamura LA.
2020.  Increasing  temperature  and  relative   Copyright    2020
Biryukov et al. This is an Address correspondence to Louis A. Al‐
tamura, Jennifer Biryukov,a Jeremy A. Boydston,a Rebecca A.  Dun‐
ning,a  John  J.  Yeager,a  Stewart Wood,a Amy L. Reese,a Allison
Ferris,a David Miller,a  Wade  Weaver,a  Nathalie  E.  Zeitouni,a
Aaron Phillips,a Denise Freeburger,a Idris Hooper,a Shanna Ratne‐
sar‐Shumate,a Jason Yolitz,a Melissa Krause,a Gregory  Williams,a
David G. Dawson,a Artemas Herzog,b Paul Dabisch,a Victoria Wahl,a
Michael C. Hevey,a Louis A. Altamuraa Biryukov et al.  a clinical
setting. Disposable exam gloves also represent a source of fomite
transmission, and this risk is likely elevated when they are used
by individuals unaccustomed to proper use, dofng, and disposal of
personal protective equipment  (PPE).   Two  previous  laboratory
studies  demonstrated persistence of infectious SARS‐CoV‐2 on nu‐
merous surfaces over extended periods;  however,  each  of  these
studies  evaluated only a single set of indoor environmental con‐
ditions and used virus suspended in cell culture media. Using  50
l  of virus‐containing droplets deposited onto nonporous (copper,
stainless steel, and plastic) and porous (cardboard) surfaces  at
21  to  23C  and 40% relative humidity (RH), van Doremalen et al.
were able to show persistence of virus on plastic  and  stainless
steel  for  up  to  72 h, whereas the durations of persistence on
cardboard (24 h) and copper (4 h) were much shorter (6). Chin  et
al.  evaluated  the  stability  of 5‐l droplets of SARS‐CoV‐2 de‐
posited on several porous (paper,  wood,  cloth,  banknote,  face
mask)  and  nonporous  (glass, stainless steel, and plastic) sur‐
faces at 22C and 65% RH. Infectious virus was  detected  on  non‐
porous surfaces for 2 to 4 days, whereas stability on porous sur‐
faces lasted 30 min to 2 days (7). Although these initial studies
provided  valuable  insights into the potential for fomite trans‐
mission in a variety of contexts, it is difcult to  fully  inter‐
pret  and  generalize  these results. First, the previous studies
did not assess the efciency of virus recovery from surfaces,  and
so  infectious  decay cannot be separated from potential physical
losses. Also, it is unclear what degree of precision was achieved
in  maintaining  temperature  and  RH  in the prior studies. More
broadly, viral persistence under indoor conditions is complex and
may  be  driven by many factors, including surface type, tempera‐
ture, relative humidity (RH),  and  matrix  (e.g.,  bodily  uids)
(812). Here, we report the rst analysis of the stability of SARS‐
CoV‐2 in simulated saliva, to represent a relevant  clinical  ma‐
trix  (13, 14), using droplets of various sizes deposited on sur‐
faces and incubated under a range of controlled  temperature  and
RH conditions, thereby providing a more complete understanding of
factors that inuence SARS‐CoV‐2  environmental  persistence.   To
determine  the stability of SARS‐CoV‐2 on surfaces, virus was di‐
luted 1:10 in simulated saliva and droplets were  deposited  onto
stainless  steel,  acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic,
or nitrile rubber glove coupons. These surfaces  were  chosen  to
represent   two  common  sources  of  fomite  transmission  (door
knobs/handles and ofce electronics) and also to address the risks
associated  with  contaminated  PPE. Virus stability was measured
using multiple RH and temperature combinations ranging  from  ap‐
proximately 20 to 80% RH and 24 to 35C. Coupons were placed in an
environmentally controlled testing plenum,  which  maintained  RH
and  temperature  set points with low variability over a total of
32 trials. During each trial, virus was recovered from three ran‐
domized  coupons into culture medium at predetermined time points
over a period of 48 h. The amount of infectious  virus  remaining
was  determined  using a quantitative cell‐based infection assay.
Virus infectivity data collected over time were tted to statisti‐
cal  models  to estimate the infectivity decay rate and half‐life
(t1/2) for each set of experimental conditions. A  single  coupon
loaded  with 0.1‐m‐diameter uorescently labeled polystyrene latex
microspheres was also collected at each time  point,  resuspended
in  buffer,  and  then  evaluated  for uorescence. These controls
showed that there was not a signicant decrease in uorescence over
time  (Fig. 1A), and the data suggest that there was no signicant
physical loss but that the reduction in virus titers  represented
biological decay. In a subset of the trials (n  6), we also quan‐
titated viral RNA using reverse transcription quantitative  real‐
time PCR (RT‐qPCR) as a second measure of physical losses but ob‐
served that its decay rate was dependent on both temperature  and
humidity  conditions  and thus concluded that viral RNA could not
be used as a physical tracer (data not shown). Although this  ob‐
servation  requires  further  experimental validation, these data
suggest that the utility of viral RNA for contamination  surveil‐
lance may be confounded by environmental conditions.  Using virus
deposited onto stainless steel coupons at ambient indoor tempera‐
ture (24C) and maintained using various levels of RH (20, 40, 60,
and 80%), we found that droplet size was not a  signicant  factor
inuencing  the half‐life of SARS‐CoV‐2 (one‐way analysis of vari‐
ance [ANOVA], P  0.39; Bartletts test, P  0.28); as a result,  we
did  not  SARS‐CoV‐2  Surface  Stability  FIG 1 Impact of droplet
size, surface type, temperature, and relative humidity  on  SARS‐
CoV‐2  decay. SARS‐CoV‐2 or uorescently labeled polystyrene latex
(PSL) beads were diluted  1:10  in  simulated  saliva,  and  then
droplets  (1,  5,  or  50  l) were deposited onto stainless steel
(SS), acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic,  or  nitrile
glove  (NG)  coupons and incubated within an environmentally con‐
trolled chamber. During each experiment, three virus test coupons
and  one  PSL  bead  coupon  were chosen randomly at various time
points over a period of 48 h. Both virus and PSL beads  were  re‐
covered  by  resuspension  into  culture  medium  and then either
quantied by a cell‐based infectivity assay on Vero cells  to  de‐
termine  the median tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50/ml) or
assayed for uorescence with a multimode plate  reader.  The  mean
half‐life  estimates  (measured in hours) for SARS‐CoV‐2 in simu‐
lated saliva under each set of conditions were derived from tting
a generalized linear model with a normal distribution and identi‐
ty link function to infectivity data from each trial  over  time.
(A)   Representative   data   comparing   SARS‐CoV‐2  infectivity
(TCID50/ml) and PSL microsphere relative uorescence  units  (RFU)
across a range of temperature and RH conditions. Data from six of
the trials are shown  where  5‐l  droplets  were  deposited  onto
stainless  steel.  Red horizontal dashed lines indicate the lower
limit of detection for the TCID50 assay  (0.2  log10  TCID50/ml).
Error  bars indicate standard deviations for each time point. (B)
Estimated virus half‐life on different surfaces from all 32  tri‐
als across a range of a droplet sizes, temperatures, and relative
humidities. Individual half‐life estimates are shown  as  points,
and  the  mean half‐life value for each surface is indicated by a
horizontal line. (C and D) Comparisons of virus  half‐life  esti‐
mates among various RH (20 to 80%) conditions (C) and temperature
(24 and 35C) and RH (20 to 80%) conditions  (D).  Bars  represent
means  of  results from each group, and error bars indicate stan‐
dard deviations. Statistical signicance (P  0.05) is indicated by
brackets and asterisks (*). A one‐way ANOVA and a Students t test
were used to calculate the data presented in panels C and D,  re‐
spectively.   further evaluate droplet size on ABS plastic or ni‐
trile rubber. Comparison of levels of virus decay determined from
all 32 trials, which used a variety of volumes, temperatures (24,
28, and 35C), and RH conditions, showed there was not a signicant
difference  in  half‐life  estimates  between  virus deposited on
stainless steel, ABS plastic, or nitrile Biryukov et al.   FIG  2
Temperature and humidity response model for SARS‐CoV‐2 decay. (A)
Using empirically determined estimates  of  SARS‐CoV‐2  half‐life
data collected under various temperature and RH conditions (24 to
35C, 20 to 60% RH), a regression analysis was performed to deter‐
mine  a  predictive  decay model. The equation shown, where xT is
temperature (C) and xRH is percent RH, can be  used  to  estimate
half‐life  (t1/2)  (in  hours) for SARS‐CoV‐2 on stainless steel,
ABS plastic, or nitrile glove rubber within the range of environ‐
mental  conditions  tested  in this study.  Actual half‐life data
are plotted against predicted half‐life estimates.  The  mean  of
all data is indicated by a horizontal blue line. The regression t
line is shown in red. The shaded region indicates  the  95%  con‐
dence  interval  of the regression t line. RMSE, root mean square
error. (B) Contour plot representing the predicted  estimates  of
SARS‐CoV‐2 half‐life data in simulated saliva on stainless steel,
ABS plastic, or nitrile rubber as a function of  temperature  and
RH.   glove  coupons  (one‐way  ANOVA, P  0.93; Bartletts test, P
0.26) (Fig. 1B). Based on these comparisons, data from all trials
were  combined  for  subsequent  analyses.  We estimated the mean
half‐life values in hours ( standard deviations [SD]) for  RH  of
20% (t1/2  15.33  2.75), 40% (t1/2  11.52  1.72), 60% (t1/2  9.15
3.39), and 80% (t1/2  8.33  1.80) at 24C, with the results  indi‐
cating  that  virus at ambient indoor conditions at 24C performed
using the Tukey‐Kramer method found the half‐life at 20% RH to be
signicantly different from the half‐life at both 60 and 80% RH (P
0.0038 and P  0.0023, respectively). We also evaluated the effect
of  temperature on the surface stability of SARS‐CoV‐2 (Fig. 1D).
When temperature was increased from 24 to 35C, the higher temper‐
ature resulted in faster virus decay and shorter half‐life at 20%
RH (t1/2  7.33  1.33), 40% RH (t1/2   7.52   1.22),  and  60%  RH
(t1/2 2.26  1.42). Pairwise comparisons of mean half‐life results
between 24 and 35C under each set of RH  conditions  (Students  t
test)  demonstrated  that  these  differences  were  signicant (P
0.0016, 0.0327, and 0.0170, respectively). At 40% RH, virus decay
was also evaluated at 28C (t1/2  6.11  3.02) and found to be sig‐
nicantly faster (Students t test; P  0.0163). The combination  of
35C  and 80% RH could not be evaluated due to test system limita‐
tions.  Analysis of estimated half‐life data from  28  trials  by
two‐way ANOVA demonstrated that both temperature and RH were sig‐
nicant factors inuencing virus decay (P  0.0001 for  both).  Fur‐
thermore, we were able to t a linear regression equation (adjust‐
ed R2  0.71) that models the half‐life of SARS‐CoV‐2 in simulated
saliva  on  nonporous surfaces (stainless steel, ABS plastic, and
nitrile rubber) (Fig. 2A). This model can also be represented  as
a contour plot and used to estimate mean viral persistence at any
combination of temperature and RH conditions  within  the  design
space  (i.e.,  20 to 60% RH and 24 to 35C) (Fig. 2B). Trials per‐
formed at the 80% RH condition (n  4) were not  included  in  the
model,  as we were able to evaluate 80% RH only at 24C.  Although
our data indicate that the virus half‐life was inversely  propor‐
tional  to  increasing temperature and RH, extrapolated estimates
for conditions beyond those empirically tested may not be  valid.
These  data  provide the rst evidence that increasing temperature
and/or RH decreased how long SARS‐CoV‐2  remained  infectious  on
two  hard, nonporous surfaces representative of commonly contami‐
nated objects, suggesting that persistence and,  SARS‐CoV‐2  Sur‐
face Stability ultimately, exposure risk may vary signicantly de‐
pending on environmental conditions. In  addition,  our  data  on
virus  stability  on nitrile gloves serve as a reminder that PPE,
when used inappropriately, has the potential to be  a  source  of
contamination.   Although  indoor temperatures can be effectively
controlled by HVAC (heating, ventilation, and  air  conditioning)
systems,  in the absence of active humidity control, indoor RH is
inuenced by outdoor weather conditions. The data shown  here  are
most  relevant  for  indoor conditions as they do not address the
signicant effect of solar radiation upon virus decay (15). Howev‐
er,  these data could be applied to virus decay on surfaces under
outdoor conditions at night  when  environmental  conditions  are
within the range tested in this study. These data can inform dis‐
infection protocols for hospital rooms or mobile COVID‐19  treat‐
ment facilities, as environments with relatively low humidity may
warrant more frequent cleaning. Temporarily  increasing  tempera‐
ture  and/or  RH  in  these spaces once they are vacated may also
complement cleaning with chemical  disinfectants  to  reduce  the
risk of potential fomite transmission.  While we have demonstrat‐
ed the impact of RH and temperature on  the  stability  of  SARS‐
CoV‐2  on  stainless steel and ABS plastic as representative non‐
porous surfaces, the applicability of  these  results  to  porous
surfaces (e.g., clothing, masks, cardboard packaging) is current‐
ly unknown and bears further investigation. In addition, data re‐
garding the amount of infectious virus present on surfaces in pa‐
tient rooms are required in order to determine how long such sur‐
faces  would  remain a source of virus transmission. Finally, the
infectious dose of SARS‐CoV‐2 is currently unknown and thus it is
difcult  to evaluate the risk of infection following contact with
a contaminated fomite.  Despite these caveats, these data can  be
used  to determine how long it would take to reduce levels of in‐
fectious virus on nonporous surfaces by a  specic  factor  (e.g.,
99.9%  reduction  after 10  t1/2) under a wider range of environ‐
mental conditions than was previously  possible.   Cell  culture.
Vero (ATCC CCL‐81) cells were used to propagate SARS‐CoV‐2 and in
virus microtitration assays. Cells were cultured at  37C  and  5%
CO2  in  complete  growth  medium  (gMEM) as previously described
(16). A ViaFill reagent dispenser (Integra Biosciences Corp.) was
utilized  to  seed  cells  into  96‐well, clear‐bottom plates for
virus microtitration assays. Cells were seeded at a  density  ap‐
propriate  to achieve approximately conuent monolayers on the day
of infection.  Virus stock production.  SARS‐CoV‐2  isolate  USA‐
WA1/2020 (NR‐52281) was deposited by the Centers for Disease Con‐
trol and Prevention and obtained through  BEI  Resources,  NIAID,
NIH. This virus (passage 4) was propagated twice in Vero cells to
yield the working stocks (passage 6)  that  were  used  for  this
work.  Briey,  a volume of 2.4  106 Vero cells suspended in 30 ml
of gMEM was combined with SARS‐CoV‐2 at a multiplicity of  infec‐
tion equal to 0.01 and was then seeded into a T‐150 ask and incu‐
bated at 37C and 5% CO2. After 24 h, a suspension of 1.2  106 un‐
infected Vero cells mixed in 0.5 ml gMEM was added to the infect‐
ed cells. At 72 h postinfection, the asks were frozen at  80C for
at  least 1 h and then thawed at 37C, and a cell scraper was used
to remove any remaining cells from the ask.  The  combination  of
the  infected  cell lysate and culture supernatant was claried by
centrifugation at 1,000  g for 10 min at 4C. Virus was  aliquoted
and  stored at  80C prior to use in experiments. The viral stocks
were sequenced and found to match the consensus  sequence  previ‐
ously  described  (MN985325.1). All work with SARS‐CoV‐2 was per‐
formed under conditions of biosafety level 3  containment.   Test
matrix.  SARS‐CoV‐2  was  diluted 1:10 in simulated saliva to ap‐
proximate the behavior of virus in a relevant bodily  uid.  Simu‐
lated saliva was prepared according to and found to be similar to
that described in previous reports (17, 18). The pH was  measured
using  a  SevenExcellence pH meter (Mettler‐Toledo). Surface ten‐
sion was measured at settings of both 15 and 750 ms on a SITA pro
line  t15 bubble pressure Biryukov et al.  TABLE 1 Composition of
simulated saliva MgCl2  6 H2O CaCl2  H2O Distilled water To  vol‐
ume  porcine gastric mucin type III (Millipore Sigma).  tensiome‐
ter (SITA Process Solutions).  Viscosity  was  measured  using  a
SV‐1A  tuning fork vibro viscometer (A&D Company, Ltd.). Percent‐
ages of solids were analyzed using a MA35 infrared moisture  ana‐
lyzer  (Sartorius).  To quantify protein content, a Pierce bicin‐
choninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit  (Thermo  Fisher  Scientic;
catalog  no.  23225) was used with an albumin standard, and tests
were read on a SpectraMax M5 plate  reader  (Molecular  Devices).
Simulated  saliva was stored at 4C for up to 2 weeks prior to use
in experiments.  Surface decay test system. To determine the bio‐
logical  decay  rate (i.e., loss of infectivity) of SARS‐CoV‐2 on
stainless steel or plastic, virus‐laden  wet  droplets  were  de‐
posited  onto coupons, which were then incubated under various RH
and temperature conditions, followed by recovery  of  virus  from
the  coupons for microtitration infectivity assays. For each test
performed on either grade 304 stainless steel (Diamond Perforated
Metals)   or  ABS  plastic,  sterilized  19‐mm‐diameter  circular
coupons were loaded with 1, 5, or 50 l of SARS‐CoV‐2 diluted 1:10
in simulated saliva. For each test performed on nitrile gloves, a
0.25‐in. square cut from nitrile gloves was placed on a stainless
steel  coupon  and  loaded with 5 l of SARS‐CoV‐2 diluted 1:10 in
simulated saliva. The coupons were immediately placed into a cus‐
tom  20‐port temperature‐ and relative humidity‐controlled plenum
supplied with constant airow at 5 liters/min.   Humidity  control
was  performed  by mixing streams of HEPA‐ltered dry and humidied
air with mass ow controllers (Alicat  Scientic).  Humid  air  was
generated by circulating ultrapure water through Naon gas humidi‐
cation bundles (Perma Pure). For temperatures  in  the  range  of
24C, the plenum was equilibrated to room temperature. For temper‐
atures outside this range, the plenum temperature was  controlled
by  circulating  a  sealed loop of chilled or heated water around
the plenum. Temperature and RH were  monitored  continuously  via
temperature/RH   probes   inserted   directly   into  the  plenum
(Vaisala), and data were collected with either LabVIEW  (National
Instruments)  or  Vaisala Insight PC software. During the experi‐
ments, temperature uctuated 2C and RH (20, 40, 60,  or  80%)  was
controlled  at  10%.  In each experiment, the initial virus titer
was determined by immediately placing virus‐laden coupons into  4
ml  gMEM, vortex mixing for 30 s at 2,400 rpm, and then quantify‐
ing infectivity via microtitration assay as described  below.  To
control  for physical efciency and sample extraction, 0.1‐mdiame‐
ter green uorescent polystyrene latex microspheres (Thermo Fisher
Scientic;  TABLE  2  Characterization of simulated saliva Protein
concn Surface tension (15 ms) Surface tension (750 ms) SARS‐CoV‐2
Surface  Stability  catalog  no.  G100B) diluted 1:1 in gMEM were
spotted onto coupons (1, 5, or  50  l),  incubated  in  the  test
plenum  with  the virus‐laden coupons, and recovered as described
for the virus, and uorescence (expressed in  relative  uorescence
units  [RFU]) was measured on a GloMax luminometer (Promega). Vi‐
ral RNA was quantied (as described below) in a subset of the sam‐
ples.  All  coupons  were processed identically at 0.75‐, 3‐, 9‐,
24‐, and 48‐h time points.   Virus  microtitration  assay.  Virus
containing  samples  were  serially  diluted (101 through 104) in
96‐well, clear‐bottom plates  containing  conuent  monolayers  of
Vero cells. For each dilution, a total of 10 replicate wells were
infected. The infected plates were incubated at 37C  and  5%  CO2
for 4 days, and then individual wells were visually inspected us‐
ing a Nikon TS100 microscope for the  presence  of  virus‐induced
cytopathic  effects (CPE) at each dilution compared to a negative
(medium only) control. The median 50% tissue  culture  infectious
dose  (TCID50)  was  estimated  for each of the samples using the
Spearman‐Karber method (19, 20).  Viral  nucleic  acid  quantica‐
tion.  SARS‐CoV‐2  RNA  was  quantied  by a reverse transcription
quantitative real‐time  PCR  (RT‐qPCR)  assay  using  an  Applied
Biosystems 7500 Fast real‐time PCR instrument and SuperScript III
one‐step RT‐PCR MasterMix with Platinum Taq DNA  polymerase.  The
target  of  the PCR assay is a conserved region of the viral RNA‐
dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) gene. Briey, viral RNA from  test
samples  was  isolated and puried using the Qiagen Viral RNA Mini
Kit centrifugation protocol per the  manufacturers  instructions.
The  PCR  master  mix was composed of sterile, molecular biology‐
grade water, 1 SuperScript reaction mix,  1  SuperScript  reverse
transcriptase,  0.2  M  forward  and  reverse  primers, and 0.1 M
6‐carboxyuorescein (FAM)‐labeled uorescent probe. The primers and
probe  were  based on primer and replace the redundant bases with
consensus bases. Reaction plates were set up by combining 5 l  of
RNA  and  15  l of PCR master mix per well. Each plate also had a
7‐point standard curve based on a synthetic DNA positive  control
representing  the assays target amplicon (gBlocks; Integrated DNA
Technologies). Cycling conditions were run as follows:  hold  for
50C  for 30 min, 95C for 10 min, and then 40 cycles of 95C for 15
s and 60C for 1 min. Quantication was determined by the number of
cycles  required to cross a threshold of 0.02 (values reported as
threshold cycles [CT]). Data representing numbers  of  viral  RNA
copies  present  in test samples per milliliter were interpolated
from the standard curves.  Design  of  experiments.  Trials  per‐
formed on both stainless steel and ABS plastic encompassed a com‐
plete design space that included 5‐l droplets  incubated  at  24C
(20,  40, 60, and 80% RH), 28C (40% RH), and 35C (20, 40, and 60%
RH). On stainless steel, additional trials were  performed  using
1‐l and 50‐l droplets at 24C (20, 40, 60, and 80% RH). For analy‐
ses using nitrile glove rubber, a reduced design space  was  uti‐
lized that permitted comparison between surface types, and trials
were performed at 24C (20 and 60% RH) and 35C (20  and  60%  RH).
Statistical  analysis.  ANOVA  was used to compare the effects of
droplet size and surface on the decay half‐life.  Bartletts  test
was  used  to  show  that  there was no statistical difference in
half‐life variance across the droplet size or surface type  data.
Analysis  of the data indicated that virus decay was biphasic and
was related to the  drying  time  of  virus‐containing  droplets.
Thus, each data set was divided into a wet phase and a dry phase.
For 20, 40, and 60% RH, the wet phase was dened from time point 0
to  0.75  h and the dry phase was from time point 0.75 h to 48 h.
For 80% RH, the wet phase was dened from time point 0 to 3 h  and
the  dry  phase  was from time point 3 h to 48 h. These estimates
were based on observations of droplet drying  during  experiments
as  well as on RH data collected from the surface test decay sys‐
tem (data not shown).  A logarithm (base 10)  transformation  was
applied  to  the  TCID50  data, and a linear model was tted using
MATLABs FITGLM with  an  identify  link  function  and  a  normal
Biryukov  et al.  distribution. Points that were below the assays
limit of detection (0.2 log10 TCID50/ml) were  removed  from  the
analysis.  The  half‐life  (t1/2) was also determined as follows:
Regression analysis was applied to determine  the  dependence  of
the  virus  half‐life  on  temperature and relative humidity. The
following model was initially assumed where xT represents temper‐
ature in degrees Celsius, xRH represents percent relative humidi‐
ty, and the  terms represent coefcients: t12xT, xRH  0  1xT  2xRH
3xTxRH   4xT2  5xRH Stepwise regression (MATLAB STEPWISELM.M) was
then used to identify and remove predictors that were insignicant
using  a  backward  elimination  approach. The stepwise procedure
starts with the full model and then measures the contribution  of
each  predictor to the residual sum of squared errors (SSE) using
an F‐test on the ratio of the SSE with and without  that  predic‐
tor;  the  most  statistically insignicant predictor (if there is
one) is then removed, and the process is repeated until  no  fur‐
ther  predictors can be removed without a statistically signicant
loss in the SSE. After determining the model, an F‐test was  per‐
formed to conrm that the model provided a better t than an inter‐
cept‐only model.  The tted residuals were then analyzed to verify
the absence of any apparent structure, and the Shapiro‐Wilke test
was used to verify residual normality. The nal model for the  de‐
cay  of  SARS‐CoV‐2  on stainless steel, ABS plastic, and nitrile
rubber as a function of temperature in degrees Celsius  and  per‐
cent  relative  humidity  is  as  follows:  t12xT, xRH  32.426272
0.622108xT  0.153707xRH It should be noted  that  this  model  is
valid  for  the range of conditions tested; extrapolation outside
the range of temperature and relative humidity values  tested  is
not advised and should be done with caution.  Data visualization.
GraphPad Prism version 8.4 was used to generate graphs.  JMP  Ge‐
nomics  version  9.1  was used to prepare a contour plot of half‐
life versus temperature and RH.  We recognize all members of  the
National  Biological  Threat Characterization Center and the many
NBACC staff members who assisted in the SARS‐CoV‐2 work  or  sup‐
ported  laboratory  operations during this time. Staff members of
the National Bioforensic Analysis  Center  were  instrumental  in
providing early support in virus propagation and also in sequenc‐
ing virus stocks. Finally, we also thank the members of  the  De‐
partment  of Homeland Security (DHS) Science and Technology (S&T)
Probabilistic Analysis of  National  Threats  Hazards  and  Risks
(PANTHR) team (Matthew Moe, Lloyd Hough, Justin Taylor, Elizabeth
Lapatovich, and Kelly Johnston).   This  work  was  funded  under
agreement  no. HSHQDC‐15‐C‐00064 awarded to Battelle operation of
the NBACC, a federally funded research  and  development  center.
The views and conclusions contained in this document are ours and
should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the  ofcial
policies, either expressed or implied, services mentioned in this
presentation. In no event shall the DHS, BNBI, or NBACC have  any
responsibility  or liability for any use of, misuse of, inability
to use, or reliance upon the information presented here.  1. Chia
PY,  Coleman  KK, Tan YK, Ong SWX, Gum M, Lau SK, Lim XF, Lim AS,
Sutjipto S, Lee PH, Son TT, Young BE, Milton DK, Gray GC,  Schus‐
ter  S,  Barkham  T, De PP, Vasoo S, Chan M, Ang BSP, Tan BH, Leo
YS, Ng OT, Wong MSY, Marimuthu  K,  Singapore  Novel  Coronavirus
Outbreak  Research  Team. 2020. Detection of air and surface con‐
tamination by SARS‐CoV‐2 in hospital rooms of infected  patients.
Nat Commun 11: 2. Guo Z‐D, Wang Z‐Y, Zhang S‐F, Li X, Li L, Li C,
Cui Y, Fu R‐B, Dong Y‐Z, Chi X‐Y, Zhang M‐Y, Liu K, Cao C, Liu B,
Zhang  K,  Gao Y‐W, Lu B, Chen W.  2020. Aerosol and surface dis‐
tribution of severe acute respiratory synmsphere.asm.org 8  SARS‐
CoV‐2 Surface Stability 13. To KK, Tsang OT, Leung WS, Tam AR, Wu
TC, Lung DC, Yip CC, Cai JP, Chan JM, Chik TS, Lau DP,  Choi  CY,
Chen  LL,  Chan WM, Chan KH, Ip JD, Ng AC, Poon RW, Luo CT, Cheng
VC, Chan JF, Hung IF, Chen Z, Chen H,  Yuen  KY.  2020.  Temporal
proles  of  viral  load in posterior oropharyngeal saliva samples
and serum antibody responses during infection  by  SARSCoV‐2:  an
observational  cohort  study.  Lancet  Infect Dis 20:565574.  14.
Chau NVV, Thanh Lam V, Thanh Dung N, Yen LM, Minh NNQ,  Hung  LM,
Ngoc  NM, Dung NT, Man DNH, Nguyet LA, Nhat LTH, Nhu LNT, Ny NTH,
Hong NTT, Kestelyn E, Dung NTP, Xuan TC, Hien TT, Thanh Phong  N,
Tu  TNH, Geskus RB, Thanh TT, Thanh Truong N, Binh NT, Thuong TC,
Thwaites G, Tan LV, OUCRU COVID‐19 research group. 2020. The nat‐
ural  15. Ratnesar‐Shumate S, Williams G, Green B, Krause M, Hol‐
land B, Wood S, Bohannon J, Boydston J, Freeburger D,  Hooper  I,
Beck  K,  Yeager  J, Altamura LA, Biryukov J, Yolitz J, Schuit M,
Wahl V, Hevey M, Dabisch P.  2020. Simulated sunlight rapidly in‐
activates SARS‐CoV‐2 on surfaces. J 16. Schuit M, Gardner S, Wood
S, Bower K, Williams G, Freeburger D, Dabisch P. 2020.  The  inu‐
ence of simulated sunlight on the inactivation of 17. Woo MH, Hsu
YM, Wu CY, Heimbuch B, Wander J. 2010. Method  for  contamination
of  ltering facepiece respirators by deposition of MS2 18. Zuo Z,
Kuehn TH, Bekele AZ, Mor SK, Verma H, Goyal SM,  Raynor  PC,  Pui
19. Karber G. 1931. Beitrag zur kollektiven Behandlung pharmakol‐
ogischer 20. Spearman C. 1908. The method of right and wrong cas‐
es  (constant  21.  Corman  V,  Bleicker T, Brunink S, Drosten C,
Landt O, Koopmans M, Peiris  ?sfvrsna9ef618c_2.  Accessed  8  May
2020.  drome coronavirus 2 in hospital wards, Wuhan, China, 2020.
Emerg Ong SWX, Tan  YK,  Chia  PY,  Lee  TH,  Ng  OT,  Wong  MSY,
Marimuthu K. 2020.  Air, surface environmental, and personal pro‐
tective equipment contamination by severe acute respiratory  syn‐
drome  coronavirus  2 (SARS‐CoV‐2) from Wu S, Wang Y, Jin X, Tian
J, Liu J, Mao Y. 2020. Environmental contamination by  SARS‐CoV‐2
in  a  designated  hospital  for coronavirus disease Ye G, Lin H,
Chen L, Wang S, Zeng Z, Wang W, Zhang S, Rebmann T, Li Y, Pan  Z,
Yang  Z,  Wang Y, Wang F, Min Qian Z, Wang X. 2020. Environmental
contamination of SARS‐CoV‐2 in healthcare premises. J Infect  van
Doremalen  N,  Bushmaker  T,  Morris  DH,  Holbrook MG, Gamble A,
Williamson BN, Tamin A, Harcourt JL,  Thornburg  NJ,  Gerber  SI,
LloydSmith  JO,  de  Wit E, Munster VJ. 2020. Aerosol and surface
stability of SARS‐CoV‐2 as compared with SARS‐CoV‐1. N Engl J Med
382:  Chin  AWH, Chu JTS, Perera MRA, Hui KPY, Yen H‐L, Chan MCW,
Peiris M, Casanova LM, Jeon S, Rutala WA, Weber  DJ,  Sobsey  MD.
2010.  Effects of van Doremalen N, Bushmaker T, Munster VJ. 2013.
Stability of Middle Kampf G, Todt D,  Pfaender  S,  Steinmann  E.
2020.  Persistence  of  coronaviruses  on  inanimate surfaces and
their inactivation with biocidal agents.  Chan KH, Peiris JS, Lam
SY,  Poon  LL, Yuen KY, Seto WH. 2011. The effects of temperature
and relative humidity on the viability of the  SARS  coronavirus.
Schuit  M, Miller DM, Reddick‐Elick MS, Wlazlowski CB, Filone CM,
Herzog A, Colf LA, Wahl‐Jensen V, Hevey M, Noah JW. 2016. Differ‐
ences  in the comparative stability of Ebola virus Makona‐C05 and
Yambuku‐Mayinga






