Sex, age, and hospitalization drive antibody responses in a COVID-19 convalescent plasma
donor population
Rebecca L. Ursin, M.S. 2, Janna R. Shapiro, M.S.3, Sarah E. Benner, Ph.D.,5 Kirsten Littlefield,
B.S. 1, Swetha Kumar, M.S.6, Harnish Mukesh Naik, M.S.6, Michael J. Betenbaugh, Ph.D.6,
Ruchee Shrestha M.P.H.5, Annie A. Wu B.S.5, Robert M. Hughes, M.D., Ph.D.5, Imani Burgess
B.A.5, Patricio Caturegli, M.D. 5, Oliver Laeyendecker, Ph.D.7,8, Thomas C. Quinn, M.D. 7,8,
David Sullivan, M.D. 1, Shmuel Shoham, M.D. 7, Andrew D. Redd, Ph.D. 7,8, Evan M. Bloch,
M.D. 5, †, Arturo Casadevall, M.D., Ph.D. 1, †, Aaron A.R. Tobian, M.D., Ph.D. 5, *,†
W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins
Health, Baltimore, MD, USA
Baltimore, MD, USA
Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA
Advanced Mammalian Biomanufacturing Innovation Center, Department of Chemical and
Baltimore, MD, USA
Short title: COVID-19 convalescent plasma antibody responses
One Sentence Summary: There is substantial heterogeneity in the antibody response to SARSCoV-2 infection, with greater antibody responses being associated with male sex, advancing age,
and hospitalization with COVID-19.
Abstract: Convalescent plasma is currently one of the leading treatments for COVID-19, but
there is a paucity of data identifying therapeutic efficacy. A comprehensive analysis of the
antibody responses in potential plasma donors and an understanding of the clinical and
demographic factors that drive variant antibody responses is needed. Among 126 potential
convalescent plasma donors, the humoral immune response was evaluated by a SARS-CoV-2
Spike (S) protein S1 domain (Euroimmun), IgA, IgG and IgM indirect ELISAs to the full-length
S or S-receptor binding domain (S-RBD), and an IgG avidity assay. Multiple linear regression
and predictive models were utilized to assess the correlations between antibody responses with
demographic and clinical characteristics. IgG titers were greater than either IgM or IgA for S1,
full length S, and S-RBD in the overall population. Of the 126 plasma samples, 101 (80%) had
IgG ELISAs ranged between 95-98%, but specificity was only 20-32%. Male sex, older age, and
hospitalization with COVID-19 were all consistently associated with increased antibody
responses across the serological assays. Neutralizing antibody titers were reduced over time in
contrast to overall antibody responses. There was substantial heterogeneity in the antibody
response among potential convalescent plasma donors, but sex, age and hospitalization emerged
as factors that can be used to identify individuals with a high likelihood of having strong antiviral
antibody levels.
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the causative agent of
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), emerged in Wuhan, China in December 2019. Following
the rapid, global spread of SARS-CoV-2, in March 2020, COVID-19 was declared a pandemic.
To date, over 9 million cases have been confirmed, spanning 188 countries or territories and
accounting for over 460,000 deaths (1). Preventive and treatment options are limited, of which
antibody therapy (i.e. convalescent plasma collected from individuals after recovery from
COVID-19) has emerged as a leading treatment for COVID-19 (2). Observational findings are
encouraging, suggesting improved clinical outcomes in those who are transfused with COVID19 convalescent plasma (CCP), including radiological resolution, reduction in viral loads, and
improved survival (3-7). Nonetheless, there is a lack of standardization of units of CCP that are
being transfused, in large part due to limited data correlating antibody assays with formal virus
neutralization activity.
Antibody responses that target the immunodominant SARS-CoV-2 Spike (S) protein —
specifically, those that target the S protein receptor binding domain (S-RBD)— are thought to be
highly associated with virus neutralization by blocking the interaction between S-RBD and the
virus receptor, angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (AEC2) (8). The SARS-CoV-2 S protein is a
highly glycosylated, trimeric protein that requires proteolytic processing to become fusogenic
and mediate virus-host membrane fusion (9, 10). The S-RBD domain is partially masked in the
pre-fusion structure of S and must be converted to an “open” conformation for optimal binding
of S to ACE2 (11). Neutralizing antibodies are of particular interest because they prevent viral
infection by blocking cell surface attachment, as well as inhibiting host membrane fusion (12,
13). Administration of CCP containing these neutralizing antibodies to individuals with COVID-
19 has been shown to result in rapid viral clearance, indicating its functionality as an antiviral
agent (6). Non-neutralizing antibodies also play a key role in viral clearance as they are needed
for antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity, antibody dependent cell mediated phagocytosis and
complement activation (14). The contribution of other antibody types such as IgM and IgA to
resolution and protection from SARS-CoV-2 infection is not clear. Using plasma samples from
126 recovered COVID-19 patients following mild or moderate disease, we compared
order to assess how the age and sex of the donor, history of hospitalization for COVID-19, and
the time of plasma collection relative to infection could be used to understand the variability of
antibody responses to SARS-CoV-2.
Immunoglobulin (Ig) isotyping in COVID-19 convalescent plasma
Convalescent plasma was collected from 126 patients with molecular confirmed SARSCoV-2 infection. The population consisted of more males (56%) than females, with a median age
moderate disease, with <10% having been hospitalized with COVID-19. Plasma samples were
collected from patients a median of 43 days (IQR 38-48) after an initial PCR+ nasal swab test.
Plasma samples were used for isotyping antibodies that recognized SARS-COV-2 S antigens.
Using the Euroimmun ELISA that recognizes either IgG or IgA against S protein domain S1, we
of anti-S1 IgG being greater than IgA (p<0.05; Fig. 1A), but positively associated with each
other (r>0.5; Fig. 1B). Consistent results were obtained with the indirect ELISAs that recognized
either S or S- RBD, in which titers of IgG, as quantified as area under the curve (AUC), were
greater than titers of either IgM or IgA (p<0.05 in each case; Fig. 1C and 1E). The AUC values
for both anti-S and anti-S-RBD IgG were positively associated with the AUC values for anti-S
and anti-S-RBD IgM and IgA, respectively (r>0.5 in each case; Fig. 1D and 1F). Finally, AUC
values for anti-S and anti-S-RBD IgG, IgM, and IgA were correlated with the respective
geometric mean titers (Fig. S1).
Fig. 1: IgG is the primary isotype produced against SARS-CoV-2 spike (S) protein.
Convalescent plasma samples from recovered COVID-19 patients were used to assess antibody
measure total IgG and IgA antibodies against the SARS-CoV-2 Spike (S) protein domain
S1 at an optical density of 450nm (OD450) and were compared to a calibrator to yield arbitrary
units (AU) (A). The correlation between anti-S1 isotypes is graphed, with the r value noted
(B). Indirect ELISAs were used to measure IgG and IgA antibody levels against S (C) and IgG,
IgM, and IgA against the S-receptor binding domain (RBD) (E) and are graphed as area under
the curve (AUC) values. The correlations between IgG and IgA for S (D) and IgG, IgM, and IgA
for S-RBD (F) are included, with r values shown and are shaded darker for higher
correlation values or lighter for lower correlation values. Graphs show mean + SEM. (n = 126)
Defining functional antibody in COVID-19 convalescent plasma
To assess the functionality of antibodies that recognize SARS-CoV-2 in convalescent plasma,
microneutralization (NT) and IgG avidity assays were performed. The reciprocal plasma dilution
providing protection from SARS-CoV-2 was used to calculate the AUC for the NT assay. Of the
defines the binding characteristics of IgG; the OD reading in the presence of various
concentrations of urea was used to calculate AU for IgG avidity (Fig. 2B). There was a positive
correlation of the results from the NT assay with IgG ELISAs for S1, S, and S-RBD and anti-S1
IgG avidity (Fig. 2C), with the correlation to S-RBD antibodies being strongest and the anti-S1
IgG avidity being weakest. Because NT titer is currently considered to be the most critical
antibody characteristic associated with protection from infection, we assessed the specificity and
sensitivity of the three S protein IgG ELISAs against the NT assay avidity (Fig. 2D). We
designated cutoffs of >20 for NT, < AU 0.8 for S1 IgG, and endpoint titers of <1:320 for S and
S-RBD ELISAs. The overall sensitivity of the IgG assays was good, with S1-IgG at 96%, S-IgG
at 98%, and S-RBD-IgG at 95%. The specificity of the IgG assays was consistently low, with
S1-IgG at 32%, S-IgG at 20%, and S-RBD-IgG at 28%.
Fig. 2: Neutralizing (NT) antibody titers correlate with IgG antibodies that recognize
SARS-CoV-2 spike (S) protein. Convalescent plasma samples from recovered COVID-19
patients were used to assess functional antibody levels. Microneutralization assays were
performed on each plasma sample in two-fold serial dilutions (A). Avidity assays used varying
amounts of urea to dissociate the anti-S1 spike protein domain IgG/antigen complex from each
plasma sample (represented as arbitrary units, AU) (B). The correlation between NT area under
the curve (AUC) values, anti-S1 IgG avidity (AU), anti-S1-IgG AU, anti-S-IgG AUC, and antiS-receptor binding domain (S-RBD)-IgG AUC are shown, with the r values indicated and shaded
darker for higher correlation values or lighter for lower correlation values (C). For each assay the
sensitivity and specificity were defined and compared to the NT AUC, with the negative cutoff
value, the number of plasma samples considered positive and negative, as well as how sensitive
and specific that assay in reference (ref) to the NT titers (D).
Host factors contributing to improved antibody responses in COVID-19 convalescent plasma
Using the unadjusted NT antibody AUC values, we determined that males consistently
S1). Both NT antibody and anti-RBD IgG titers, in particular, were consistently higher among
and Fig S2).
Multiple linear regressions were used to isolate the effects of sex, age, hospitalization, or
time since PCR-positive (PCR+) nasal swab on the antibody response to SARS-CoV-2 while
being male, an older adult, and being hospitalized with COVID-19 were each associated with
having greater NT AUC values, anti-S1 IgG AU, anti-S IgG AUC values, and anti-RBD IgG
AUC values (p<0.05 in each case). In comparing the effect size of each parameter, being
hospitalized was associated with the largest increase in antibody response (Fig. 3Q). In
comparing the four assays, being male, older, and hospitalized had the largest effect on the antiS1-IgG response. The only antibody measure associated with time (days, scaled by 10) since
PCR+ nasal swab test was NT responses, which were reduced as the days since the PCR+ nasal
swab test increased (p<0.05; Fig. 3P-Q).
Fig. 3: Sex, age, hospitalization, and time since PCR+ nasal swab are associated with
antibody responses to SARS-CoV-2. Multiple linear regressions were performed on the
continuous outcomes of anti-spike (S) protein domain S1 IgG arbitrary units (AU) (A, E, I, M),
anti-S-IgG area under the curve (AUC) (B, F, J, N), anti-S-RBD AUC (C, J, K, O), and
neutralizing antibody (NT) AUC (D, H, L, P). For each outcome, the model included parameters
for the four predictors of interest: sex (A-D), age in decades (E-H), hospitalization status (J-L),
and number of days since PCR+ nasal swab (M-P). Regression models included the 121 subjects
for which complete predictor data was available (date of PCR+ swab was missing for 3 subjects).
In each panel, colored circles show the raw data, and white dots show the marginal effect of the
given predictor, or the model-predicted outcome (with 95% CI) for the average person for
different levels of the given predictor. P-values on top of each panel represent the significance
level for the parameter. The four models are summarized in Q, where the position of the marker
indicates the coefficient value + 95% CI, and stars indicate significance (* = p<0.05).
Predictors of strong antibody responses in donors of COVID-19 convalescent plasma
The convalescent plasma samples were categorized into quartiles based on their
neutralizing AUC value, anti-S1 IgG AU, anti-S AUC value, or anti-RBD AUC value resulting
in scores ranging from 0 (lowest quartile for each antibody measure) to 12 (highest quartile for
each antibody measure) to model the optimal antibody responses in convalescent plasma (Fig.
4A). 16/126 (13%) of donors were in the lowest decile in all measured responses.
Multiple linear regression on the composite score encompassing the quartiles for each antibody
measure revealed that being male, advancing in age, and hospitalized with severe COVID-19
could each predict greater antibody responses against SARS-CoV-2 (Fig. 4B-D). In contrast,
time elapsed since PCR+ nasal swab was not predictive of greater antibody responses (Fig. 4E).
In terms of effect size, being male resulted in an average numerical increase in score of 1.5
compared to being female, advancing age by a decade resulted in a <1 numerical increase, and
being hospitalized resulted in an average increase of 5 in the quartile score (Fig. 4F). Taken
together, these data suggest that being hospitalized with severe COVID-19 and male could be
used as predictors of greater convalescent plasma antibody responses against SARS-CoV-2.
Fig. 4: Male sex and hospitalization are predictors of overall greater antibody titers in
convalescent plasma. Composite scores were computed for each subject based on the quartile of
their response across the anti-spike (S) protein domain S1 IgG, anti-S-IgG, anti-S-receptor
binding domain (S-RBD) IgG, and neutralizing antibody (NT) assays (A). The distribution of
scores among the study population is shown to the right of the heatmap. Multiple linear
regression was performed on the continuous outcome of score, including parameters for sex, age
in decades, hospitalization status, and number of days since PCR+ nasal swab scaled by ten. For
each predictor, the raw data is shown in gray, and the marginal effect + 95% CI of the given
predictor for the average individual in the study is shown in white (B-E). P-values on top of each
panel represent the significance level for the parameter. The model is summarized in F, where
the position of the marker indicates the coefficient value + 95% CI, or the expected increase in
score for a one unit increase in each predictor.
COVID-19 convalescent plasma has emerged as a leading therapy for hospitalized
COVID-19 patients, with thousands of patients treated to date (5). There is a compelling
argument for why it could be effective either as prophylaxis after exposure, or as treatment for
early disease (15). Consequently, it is important to measure the antibody response following
recovery from infection with SARS-CoV-2 responses to understand characteristics for ideal
convalescent plasma donation. These data suggest that diverse isotypes of antibody are
ELISA to S1 protein and ELISAs to S and S-RBD correlate with the neutralizing titers, they
have poor specificity. The poor specificity of the IgG ELISAs with NT titers suggest that overall
antibody levels may not accurately reflect NT activity in plasma. In addition, while overall
antibody levels seemed constant, there was a significant decrease in NT antibody titers over time.
Overall, greater NT and IgG titers were associated with male sex, older age, and a history of
hospitalization, but further investigation is needed to determine if common or divergent factors
are driving these associations.
The heterogeneity in the antibody response demonstrated in this study is consistent with
generate greater titers of antibodies ≥14 days after resolution of symptoms (16), 30% of patients
do not appear to develop sufficient neutralizing antibody titers following infection (17). In the
age, and hospitalization with severe COVID-19 were associated with greater NT and IgG
responses to SARS-CoV-2. Greater IgG titers were correlated with worse COVID-19 outcomes,
which is also reflected in the link between greater titers and increased age (18).
Male sex also is associated with greater risk of more severe COVID-19 outcomes (19).
The greater antibody responses in convalescent plasma from males as compared with females is
striking given that females usually mount stronger immune responses than males (20). One
possible explanation for this apparent reversal in sex-related differences in antibody responses to
SARS-CoV-2 is that males with COVID-19 tend to have more severe disease than females, and
enhanced inflammatory responses associated with increased disease severity could drive higher
B cell recruitment and consequently, more antibody production. In this regard, the magnitude of
antibody responses also correlates with disease severity in other infectious diseases, such as
active tuberculosis (21).
There are limitations associated with this study. The samples were cross-sectional with a
relatively tight window of collection. Therefore, the kinetics of the complete antibody response
over time could not be determined, and it was difficult to assess how the time relative to the
initial diagnosis correlates with the overall titer. The sampled population, however, represented
a clinically diverse population with a wide age range that is representative of the blood donor
population. The study was also limited by the lack of measurement of non-direct measures of
antibody function (e.g., phagocytosis, antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity), but the
importance of these mechanisms is not known.
Initially, the FDA recommended that convalescent plasma donors would optimally have
ELISA titers exceeding 1:320; this was subsequently lowered given concerns that insufficient
donors would attain this threshold (15). Currently, the FDA recommends a NT concentration of
>160, yet allow for a lower titer (1:80) if an alternative is unavailable (22). The FDA, however,
has not been prescriptive about the assays used to derive these titer levels despite the potential
variability by assay. Data from the Expanded Access Program and clinical trials are urgently
needed to interpret the titers with respect to that clinical outcomes and prevention. These results
provide a roadmap to select individuals who are likely to have high levels of neutralizing and
anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgG antibodies to be preferred convalescent plasma donors.
Materials and Methods
Study participants, blood sample processing, and storage
Individuals with a history of COVID-19 who were interested in donating convalescent
plasma were contacted by study personnel. All subjects had to be at least 18 years old and have
Donors were informed that they needed to satisfy standard eligibility criteria for blood donation
(e.g., not pregnant within the last six weeks, never been diagnosed or have risk factors for
transfusion-transmitted infections such as HIV, hepatitis B virus or hepatitis C virus). These
individuals were then invited to participate in the study. Basic demographic information (age,
sex, and hospitalization with COVID-19) was obtained from the subject (i.e. potential donor);
confirmation of the original diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 was required either by medical chart
Eligible subjects were enrolled in the study under full informed consent; following consent, ~25
mL of whole blood was collected in ACD tubes. The samples were separated into plasma and
peripheral blood mononuclear cells within 12 hours of collection. The plasma samples were
Plasmid preparation
Recombinant plasmid constructs containing modified Spike (S) protein or S protein
Receptor Binding Domain (RBD) and a beta-lactamase (amp) gene were obtained (23) and
amplified in E.coli after transformation and growth on LB agar plates coated with Ampicillin.
The plasmids were extracted using GigaPrep kits (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and eluted in
molecular biology grade water.
Recombinant protein expression
HEK293.2sus cells (ATCC) were obtained and adapted to Freestyle™ F-17 medium
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) and BalanCD® (Irvine Scientific) using polycarbonate shake flasks
(Fisherbrand) with 4mM GlutaMAX supplementation (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The cells were
routinely maintained every 4 days at a seeding density of 0.5 million cells/mL. They were
cultured at 37°C, 90% humidity with 5% CO2 for cells in BalanCD® while those in F-17 were
maintained at 8% CO2. Cells were counted using trypan blue dye (Gibco) exclusion method and
a haemocytometer. Cell viability was always maintained above 90%. Twenty-four hours prior to
transfection (Day -1), the cells were seeded at a density of 1 million cells/mL, ensuring that the
cell viability was above 90%. Polyethylenimine (PEI) stocks, with 25 kDa molecular weight
(Polysciences), were prepared in MilliQ water at a concentration of 1 mg/mL. This was sterile
filtered through a 0.22 µm syringe filter (Corning), aliquoted and stored at -20°C.
On the day of transfection (Day 0), the cells were counted to ensure sufficient growth and
viability. OptiPRO™ SFM (Gibco) was used as the medium for transfection mixture. For 100
mL of cell culture, 2 tubes were aliquoted with 6.7 mL each of OptiPRO™, one for PEI and the
other for rDNA. DNA:PEI ratio of 1:3.5 was used for transfection. A volume of 350 µl of
prepared PEI stock solution was added to tube 1 while 100 µg of rDNA was added to tube 2 and
incubated for 5 minutes. Post incubation, these were mixed together, incubated for 10 minutes at
RT and then added to the culture through gravity addition. The cells were returned back to the
37°C incubator. A day after transfection (Day 1), the cells were spun down at 1,000 rpm for 7
minutes at RT and resuspended in fresh media with GlutaMAX™ supplementation. 3-5 hours
after resuspension, 0.22 µm sterile filtered Sodium butyrate (EMD Millipore) was added to the
flask at a final concentration of 5 mM (Grünberg et al.). The cells were allowed to grow for a
period of 4-5 days. Cell counts, viability, glucose and lactate values were measured every day.
Cells were harvested when either the viability fell below 60% or when the glucose was depleted,
by centrifugation at 5000 rpm for 10 minutes at RT. Cell culture supernatants containing either
recombinant RBD or S protein were filtered through 0.22 µm PES membrane stericup filters
(Millipore Sigma) to remove cell debris and stored at -20°C until purification.
Protein purification
Protein purification by immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) and gravity
flow was adapted from previous methods (23). After washing with Phosphate-Buffered Saline
(PBS; Thermo Fisher Scientific), Nickel-Nitrilotriacetic acid (Ni-NTA) agarose (Qiagen) was
added to culture supernatant followed by overnight incubation (12-16 hours) at 4 °C on a rotator.
For every 150 mL of culture supernatant, 2.5 mL of Ni-NTA agarose was added. 5mL gravity
flow polypropylene columns (Qiagen) were equilibrated with PBS. One polypropylene column
was used for every 150 mL of culture supernatant. The supernatant-agarose mixture was then
loaded onto the column to retain the agarose beads with recombinant proteins bound to the
beads. Each column was then washed, first with 1X culture supernatant volume of PBS and then
with 25 mL of 20 mM imidazole (Millipore Sigma) in PBS wash buffer to remove host cell
proteins. Recombinant proteins were then eluted from each column in three fractions with 5 mL
of 250 mM imidazole in PBS elution buffer per fraction giving a total of 15 mL eluate per
column. The eluate was subsequently dialyzed several times against PBS using Amicon Ultra
Centrifugal Filters (Millipore Sigma) at 7000 rpm for 20 minutes at 10 °C to remove the
imidazole and concentrate the eluate. Filters with a 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off were used
for RBD eluate whereas filters with a 50 kDa molecular weight cut-off were used for full length
S eluate. The final concentration of the recombinant RBD and S proteins was measured by
bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and purity was assessed on 10%
SDS-PAGE (Bio-Rad) followed by Coomassie blue staining. After sufficient destaining in water
overnight, clear single bands were visible for RBD and S proteins at their respective molecular
Viruses and cells
Vero-E6 cells (ATCC CRL-1586) and Vero-E6-TMPRSS2 cells (24) were cultured in
Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEMD) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco), 1
mM glutamine (Invitrogen), 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Invitrogen), 100 U/ml of penicillin
(Invitrogen), and 100 μg/ml of streptomycin (Invitrogen) (complete media or CM). Cells were
incubated in a 5% CO2 humidified incubator at 37°C.
The SARS-CoV-2/USA-WA1/2020 virus was obtained from BEI Resources. The
infectious virus titer was determined on Vero cells using a 50% tissue culture infectious dose
(TCID50) assay as previously described for SARS-CoV (25, 26). Serial 10-fold dilutions of the
virus stock were made in infection media (IM, which is identical to CM except the FBS is
reduced to 2.5%), then then 100 μl of each dilution was added to Vero cells in a 96-well plate in
sextuplicate. The cells were incubated at 37°C for 4 days, visualized by staining with naphthol
blue-black, and scored visually for cytopathic effect. A Reed and Muench calculation was used
to determine TCID50 per ml (27).
Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assays (ELISAs)
Lakes, NJ) for both IgA and IgG was validated in a Clinical Laboratory Improvement
Amendments (CLIA)-certified laboratory. The assay was performed per the manufacturer’s
specification. The optical density (OD) of the sample divided by the OD of the calibrator from
that run, and the ratio is the arbitrary unit (AU). Per the manufacturer, an AU 0-0.79 was
considered negative, 0.80-0.99 was borderline and ≥1.0 was positive.
To measure anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgG avidity, each reaction utilized the following
components: 100 µl of plasma (1:101 dilution per manufactures protocol), 100 µl of undiluted
positive, negative and calibrator controls. Plates containing reaction components were incubated
for 1 hour at 37°C followed by 3 washes. A 300 μl volume of wash buffer containing urea at
varying concentrations (0M, 1M, 2M, 4M, 6M or 8M) were added to the plates and incubated at
37°C for 10 minutes (28). Plates were washed 3 times, followed by the manufacturer’s protocol
for addition of conjugate and substrate. Ratios of ≥0.8 were considered positive. DC50
(Dissociation Constant 50) calculations were performed using AAT Bioquest IC50 calculator
using four parameter logistic regression model (AAT Bioquest, Inc. (2020, June 09). Quest
Krammer’s laboratory (23). Ninety-six well plates (Immulon 4HBX, Thermo Fisher) were
coated with either full length S protein or S-RBD) at a volume of 50 µl of 2 µg/ml of diluted
antigen in filtered, sterile 1xPBS (Thermo Fisher) at 4oC overnight. Coating buffer was removed,
plates were washed three times with 300 µl of PBS-T wash buffer (1xPBS plus 0.1% Tween 20,
Fisher Scientific), and blocked with 200 µl of PBS-T with 3% non-fat milk (milk powder,
American Bio) by volume for one hour at room temperature. All plasma samples were heat
inactivated at 56oCon a heating block for one hour prior to use. Negative control samples were
prepared at 1:10 dilutions in PBS-T in 1% non-fat milk and plated at a final concentration of
1:100. A monoclonal antibody (mAb) towards the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein was used as a
positive control (1:5,000, Sino Biological). For serial dilutions of plasma on either S or S-RBDcoated plates, plasma samples were prepared in three-fold serial dilutions starting at 1:20 in PBST in 1% non-fat-milk. Blocking solution was removed and 10 µl of diluted plasma was added in
duplicates to plates and incubated at room temperature for two hours. Plates were washed three
times with PBS-T wash buffer and 50 µl secondary antibody was added to plates and incubated
at room temperature for one hour. Anti-human secondary antibodies used included Fc-specific
total IgG HRP (1:5,000 dilution, Invitrogen), IgM heavy chain HRP (1:5,000, Invitrogen), and
IgA cross-adsorbed HRP (1:5,000, Invitrogen); all were prepared in PBS-T plus 1% non-fat
milk. Plates were washed and all residual liquid removed before adding 100 µl of SIGMAFAST
OPD (o-phenylenediamine dihydrochloride) solution (Sigma Aldrich) to each well, followed by
incubation in darkness at room temperature for ten minutes. To stop the reaction, 50 µl of 3M
hydrochloric acid (HCl, Fisher Scientific) was added to each well. The OD of each plate was
read at 490nm (OD490) on a SpectraMax i3 ELISA plate reader (BioTek). The positive cutoff
value for each plate was calculated by summing the average of the negative values and three
times the standard deviation of the negatives. All values at or above the cutoff value were
considered positive.
Microneutralization assay
Plasma neutralization titers were determined as described for SARS-CoV (29). Two-fold
dilutions of plasma (starting at a 1:20 dilution) were made in IM. Infectious virus was added to
the plasma dilutions at a final concentration of 1x104 TCID50/ml (100 TCID50 per 100ul). The
samples were incubated for one hour at room temperature, then 100 uL of each dilution was
added to one well of a 96 well plate of VeroE6-TMPRSS2 cells in sextuplet for 6 hours at 37˚C.
The inoculums were removed, fresh IM was added, and the plates were incubated at 37˚C for 2
days. The cells were fixed by the addition of 150 uL of 4% formaldehyde per well, incubated for
at least 4 hours at room temperature, then stained with Napthol blue black. The nAb titer was
calculated as the highest serum dilution that eliminated cytopathic effect (CPE) in 50% of the
Statistical analyses
Descriptive analyses. Area under the curve (AUC) values were computed by plotting
normalized OD values against sample dilution for ELISAs. AUC for NT assays utilized the exact
number of wells protected from infection at each plasma dilution. For each assay, samples with
titers below the limit of detection were assigned an arbitrary AUC value of half of the lowest
measured AUC value. The data were then log-transformed to achieve a normal distribution.
Descriptive statistics stratified by sex were presented as medians and interquartile ranges, and
male-female comparisons overall and in each age category were done using simple T-tests. AUC
values for IgG, IgA and IgM were compared using a one-way ANOVA. Correlations between
antibody isotypes and assays were assessed using Pearson’s correlation coefficient. Where binary
cut-offs were available, IgG data were dichotomized using the 1:320 cut-off originally
recommended by the FDA (15) or the cut-off of AU > 0.8 suggested by the manufacturer.
Sensitivity and specificity were then calculated using neutralizing antibody (i.e. titer > 1:20) as
the reference assay.
Predictors of assay-specific responses. Multiple linear regressions were performed to
assess the impact of the demographic (age in decades and sex) and clinical factors
(hospitalization status and days since PCR+ swab scaled by 10) on S1-IgG OD values, log AUC
values for anti-RBD and anti-spike IgG, as well as neutralizing antibody. All predictor estimates
were adjusted for the three other parameters in the model. Various additional parameters were
tested, including and interaction term between age and sex and linear splines at different ages,
but decreased the overall fit of the model and were therefore not included in further analysis.
Data are presented as the marginal effect of each predictor for the average person in the study
population (30) along with coefficients and 95% confidence intervals of each estimate .
Composite score representing overall quality of antibody response. Composite scores
were computed to provide a single metric as a proxy for the overall quality of the antibody
response. The responses for S1-IgG, S-IgG, S-RBD and neutralizing assays were divided into
quartiles, and subjects were assigned a score of 0 (lowest quartile) to 3 (highest) quartile for each
assay. The assay-specific scores were summed to create the composite score, ranging from 0
(lowest quartile for each assay) to 12 (highest quartile for each assay). A multiple linear
regression model was then performed on the composite score, including parameters for sex, age
in decades, hospitalization status and number of days since PCR+ swab (scaled by ten). As
above, data are presented as the marginal effect of each predictor for the average person in the
study population (30) along with coefficients and 95% confidence intervals of each estimate. All
analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 8 and Stata 15.
Acknowledgments: We are grateful for all of the study participants who donated plasma, the
clinical staff, including Sonali Thapa and Liz Martinez, Mary De'Jarnette, Carlos Aguado, Peggy
Iraola, Jackie Lobien who collected samples, and the technical staff, including Yolanda Eby, Rey
Fernandez, Haley Schmidt, Charles Kirby, Ethan Klock, Owen Baker, Jernelle Miller, and
Morgan Keruly who aliquoted and stored samples for this study. We thank Florian Krammer of
of ELISA antigens.
Funding This work was supported in part by NIH Specialized Center of Research Excellence
U54AG062333 (S.L.K, A.P., H-S.P, J.S.); NIH Center of Excellence in Influenza Research and
Surveillance HHSN272201400007C (A.P., K.L., S.L.K., R.L.U.); T32A1007417 Molecular and
Diseases (NIAID) AI052733 and AI15207 (A.C.); NIAID R01AI120938 and R01AI128779
(A.A.R.T); the Division of Intramural Research, NIAID (O.L., T.Q.); National Heart Lung and
(A.C.); Department of Defense W911QY2090012 (A.C. and D.S.).
A.T. wrote the IRB protocol; R.S., A.W, R.M.H., I.B., E.M.B. and A.T recruited participants;
S.L.K., A.P., H-S.P., R.L.U., K.L., O.L., T.Q. S.E.B., A.R., E.M.B, and A.T. carried out all
experiments; H.M.N., S.K. and M.J.B. produced recombinant SARS-CoV-2 proteins; J.R.S.
performed statistical analyses; S.L.K., A.P.,H-S.P., R.L.U., J.S., E.M.B., A.C., and A.T. wrote
Competing interests: EMB reports personal fees and non-financial support from Terumo BCT,
personal fees and non-financial support from Grifols Diagnostics Solutions, outside of the
submitted work; EMB is a member of the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
Blood Products Advisory Committee. Any views or opinions that are expressed in this
judgment; they do not necessarily represent the views of either the Blood Products Advisory
Committee or the formal position of FDA, and also do not bind or otherwise obligate or commit
either Advisory Committee or the Agency to the views expressed.
Fig. S1: Reciprocal antibody titers and area under the curve comparisons for
quantification of anti-spike (S) and anti-S-receptor binding domain (S-RBD) IgG, IgM, and
IgA. The optical density at 490nm for each three-fold, serially diluted plasma sample was
measured in the indirect ELISAs. ELISAs measuring IgG and IgA in serial dilution against the
spike (S) protein (A, C) and IgG, IgM, and IgA against the S-receptor binding domain (S-RBD)
are shown, with hospitalized patients represented by black lines (E, G, I). The correlation
between the antibody titer and the area under the curve (AUC) are shown for IgG and IgA
against S (B, D) and for IgG, IgM, and IgA against S-RBD (F, H, J). The correlation between
the neutralizing antibody (NT) titer and the calculated AUC is shown (K).
Fig. S2. Unadjusted boxplots showing age-associated antibody responses for male and
female convalescent plasma donors. Box plots by sex and age categories are shown for antispike (S) protein domain S1 IgG arbitrary units (AU) (A), anti-S-IgG area under the curve
(AUC) (B), anti-S-receptor binding domain (S-RBD) AUC (C), and neutralizing antibody (NT)
AUC (D). Sex differences in each age category were analyzed using simple t-tests, and
significance is indicated on top of each comparison where appropriate (* = p-value <0.05).
protein domain S1 IgG arbitrary units (AU), anti-S IgG AUC values, and anti-S-receptor binding
domain (S-RBD) IgG AUC values for all 126 patients and broken down by sex.
curve (AUC) values, anti-spike (S) protein domain S1 IgG arbitrary units (AU), anti-S IgG AUC
values, and anti-S-receptor binding domain (S-RBD) IgG AUC values for all 126 patients and
broken down by sex, age, hospitalization, and days since PCR+ nasal swab.
WHO, WHO, Ed. (2020), vol. 2020.
A. Casadevall, L. A. Pirofski, The convalescent sera option for containing COVID-19. J Clin Invest,
C. Shen, Z. Wang, F. Zhao, Y. Yang, J. Li, J. Yuan, F. Wang, D. Li, M. Yang, L. Xing, J. Wei, H. Xiao, Y.
Yang, J. Qu, L. Qing, L. Chen, Z. Xu, L. Peng, Y. Li, H. Zheng, F. Chen, K. Huang, Y. Jiang, D. Liu, Z.
Zhang, Y. Liu, L. Liu, Treatment of 5 Critically Ill Patients With COVID-19 With Convalescent Plasma.
K. Duan, B. Liu, C. Li, H. Zhang, T. Yu, J. Qu, M. Zhou, L. Chen, S. Meng, Y. Hu, C. Peng, M. Yuan, J.
Huang, Z. Wang, J. Yu, X. Gao, D. Wang, X. Yu, L. Li, J. Zhang, X. Wu, B. Li, Y. Xu, W. Chen, Y. Peng,
Y. Hu, L. Lin, X. Liu, S. Huang, Z. Zhou, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, K. Deng, Z. Xia, Q. Gong, W.
Zhang, X. Zheng, Y. Liu, H. Yang, D. Zhou, D. Yu, J. Hou, Z. Shi, S. Chen, Z. Chen, X. Zhang, X. Yang,
Effectiveness of convalescent plasma therapy in severe COVID-19 patients. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 117,
M. J. Joyner, R. S. Wright, D. Fairweather, J. W. Senefeld, K. A. Bruno, S. A. Klassen, R. E. Carter, A. M.
Klompas, C. C. Wiggins, J. R. Shepherd, R. F. Rea, E. R. Whelan, A. J. Clayburn, M. R. Spiegel, P. W.
Johnson, E. R. Lesser, S. E. Baker, K. F. Larson, J. G. Ripoll, K. J. Andersen, D. O. Hodge, K. L. Kunze,
M. R. Buras, M. N. Vogt, V. Herasevich, J. J. Dennis, R. J. Regimbal, P. R. Bauer, J. E. Blair, C. M. van
Buskirk, J. L. Winters, J. R. Stubbs, N. S. Paneth, N. C. Verdun, P. Marks, A. Casadevall, Early safety
indicators of COVID-19 convalescent plasma in 5,000 patients. J Clin Invest, (2020).
L. Li, W. Zhang, Y. Hu, X. Tong, S. Zheng, J. Yang, Y. Kong, L. Ren, Q. Wei, H. Mei, C. Hu, C. Tao, R.
Yang, J. Wang, Y. Yu, Y. Guo, X. Wu, Z. Xu, L. Zeng, N. Xiong, L. Chen, J. Wang, N. Man, Y. Liu, H.
Xu, E. Deng, X. Zhang, C. Li, C. Wang, S. Su, L. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Wu, Z. Liu, Effect of Convalescent
Plasma Therapy on Time to Clinical Improvement in Patients With Severe and Life-threatening COVID19: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA, (2020).
S. T. H. Liu, H.-M. Lin, I. Baine, A. Wajnberg, J. P. Gumprecht, F. Rahman, D. Rodriguez, P. Tandon, A.
Bassily-Marcus, J. Bander, C. Sanky, A. Dupper, A. Zheng, D. R. Altman, B. K. Chen, F. Krammer, D. R.
Mendu, A. Firpo-Betancourt, M. A. Levin, E. Bagiella, A. Casadevall, C. Cordon-Cardo, J. S. Jhang, S. A.
Arinsburg, D. L. Reich, J. A. Aberg, N. M. Bouvier, Convalescent plasma treatment of severe COVID-19:
A matched control study. medRxiv, 2020.2005.2020.20102236 (2020).
S. J. Zost, P. Gilchuk, J. B. Case, E. Binshtein, R. E. Chen, J. X. Reidy, A. Trivette, R. S. Nargi, R. E.
Sutton, N. Suryadevara, L. E. Williamson, E. C. Chen, T. Jones, S. Day, L. Myers, A. O. Hassan, N. M.
Kafai, E. S. Winkler, J. M. Fox, J. J. Steinhardt, K. Ren, Y. M. Loo, N. L. Kallewaard, D. R. Martinez, A.
Schafer, L. E. Gralinski, R. S. Baric, L. B. Thackray, M. S. Diamond, R. H. Carnahan, J. E. Crowe,
Potently neutralizing human antibodies that block SARS-CoV-2 receptor binding and protect animals.
A. C. Walls, Y. J. Park, M. A. Tortorici, A. Wall, A. T. McGuire, D. Veesler, Structure, Function, and
Antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Glycoprotein. Cell 181, 281-292 e286 (2020).
Q. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Wu, S. Niu, C. Song, Z. Zhang, G. Lu, C. Qiao, Y. Hu, K. Y. Yuen, Q. Wang, H.
Zhou, J. Yan, J. Qi, Structural and Functional Basis of SARS-CoV-2 Entry by Using Human ACE2. Cell
J. Shang, Y. Wan, C. Luo, G. Ye, Q. Geng, A. Auerbach, F. Li, Cell entry mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 117, 11727-11734 (2020).
L. A. VanBlargan, L. Goo, T. C. Pierson, Deconstructing the Antiviral Neutralizing-Antibody Response:
P. J. Klasse, Neutralization of Virus Infectivity by Antibodies: Old Problems in New Perspectives. Adv Biol
H. A. Vanderven, S. J. Kent, The protective potential of Fc-mediated antibody functions against influenza
virus and other viral pathogens. Immunol Cell Biol 98, 253-263 (2020).
E. M. Bloch, S. Shoham, A. Casadevall, B. S. Sachais, B. Shaz, J. L. Winters, C. van Buskirk, B. J.
Grossman, M. Joyner, J. P. Henderson, A. Pekosz, B. Lau, A. Wesolowski, L. Katz, H. Shan, P. G.
Auwaerter, D. Thomas, D. J. Sullivan, N. Paneth, E. Gehrie, S. Spitalnik, E. Hod, L. Pollack, W. T.
Nicholson, L. A. Pirofski, J. A. Bailey, A. A. Tobian, Deployment of convalescent plasma for the
prevention and treatment of COVID-19. J Clin Invest, (2020).
K. Duan, B. Liu, C. Li, H. Zhang, T. Yu, J. Qu, M. Zhou, L. Chen, S. Meng, Y. Hu, C. Peng, M. Yuan, J.
Huang, Z. Wang, J. Yu, X. Gao, D. Wang, X. Yu, L. Li, J. Zhang, X. Wu, B. Li, Y. Yu, W. Chen, Y. Peng,
Y. Hu, L. Lin, X. Liu, S. Huang, Z. Zhou, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, K. Deng, Z. Xia, Q. Gong, W.
Zhang, X. Zheng, Y. Liu, H. Yang, D. Zhou, D. Yu, J. Hou, Z. Shi, S. Chen, Z. Chen, X.-x. Zhang, X.
Yang, The feasibility of convalescent plasma therapy in severe COVID-19 patients: a pilot study. medRxiv,
X. Wang, X. Guo, Q. Xin, Y. Pan, J. Li, Y. Chu, Y. Feng, Q. Wang, Neutralizing Antibodies Responses to
SARS-CoV-2 in COVID-19 Inpatients and Convalescent Patients. medRxiv, 2020.2004.2015.20065623
B. Zhang, X. Zhou, C. Zhu, F. Feng, Y. Qiu, J. Feng, Q. Jia, Q. Song, B. Zhu, J. Wang, Immune
phenotyping based on neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio and IgG predicts disease severity and outcome for
patients with COVID-19. medRxiv, 2020.2003.2012.20035048 (2020).
E. P. Scully, J. Haverfield, R. L. Ursin, C. Tannenbaum, S. L. Klein, Considering how biological sex
K. L. Flanagan, A. L. Fink, M. Plebanski, S. L. Klein, Sex and Gender Differences in the Outcomes of
X. Yu, R. Prados-Rosales, E. R. Jenny-Avital, K. Sosa, A. Casadevall, J. M. Achkar, Comparative
evaluation of profiles of antibodies to mycobacterial capsular polysaccharides in tuberculosis patients and
controls stratified by HIV status. Clin Vaccine Immunol 19, 198-208 (2012).
FDA, FDA, Ed. (2020), vol. 2020.
D. Stadlbauer, F. Amanat, V. Chromikova, K. Jiang, S. Strohmeier, G. A. Arunkumar, J. Tan, D. Bhavsar,
C. Capuano, E. Kirkpatrick, P. Meade, R. N. Brito, C. Teo, M. McMahon, V. Simon, F. Krammer, SARSCoV-2 Seroconversion in Humans: A Detailed Protocol for a Serological Assay, Antigen Production, and
Test Setup. Curr Protoc Microbiol 57, e100 (2020).
S. Matsuyama, N. Nao, K. Shirato, M. Kawase, S. Saito, I. Takayama, N. Nagata, T. Sekizuka, H. Katoh, F.
Kato, M. Sakata, M. Tahara, S. Kutsuna, N. Ohmagari, M. Kuroda, T. Suzuki, T. Kageyama, M. Takeda,
Enhanced isolation of SARS-CoV-2 by TMPRSS2-expressing cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 117, 70017003 (2020).
S. R. Schaecher, E. Touchette, J. Schriewer, R. M. Buller, A. Pekosz, Severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus gene 7 products contribute to virus-induced apoptosis. J Virol 81, 11054-11068 (2007).
S. R. Schaecher, J. M. Mackenzie, A. Pekosz, The ORF7b protein of severe acute respiratory syndrome
Q. Wang, Q. Du, B. Guo, D. Mu, X. Lu, Q. Ma, Y. Guo, L. Fang, B. Zhang, G. Zhang, X. Guo, A Method
To Prevent SARS-CoV-2 IgM False Positives in Gold Immunochromatography and Enzyme-Linked
Immunosorbent Assays. J Clin Microbiol 58, (2020).
S. R. Schaecher, J. Stabenow, C. Oberle, J. Schriewer, R. M. Buller, J. E. Sagartz, A. Pekosz, An
immunosuppressed Syrian golden hamster model for SARS-CoV infection. Virology 380, 312-321 (2008).
R. Williams, Using the margins command to estimate and interpret adjusted predictions and marginal
