Coronavirus Disease Pandemic (COVID-19):
Challenges and a Global Perspective
Yashpal Singh Malik 1,*, Naveen Kumar 2, Shubhankar Sircar 1, Rahul Kaushik 3,
Sudipta Bhat 1, Kuldeep Dhama 4,*, Parakriti Gupta 5, Kapil Goyal 5, Mini P
Singh 5, Ujjala Ghoshal 6, Mohamed E. El Zowalaty 7,8, VinodhKumar O. R 9,
Mohd Iqbal Yatoo 10, Ruchi Tiwari 11, Mamta Pathak 4, Shailesh Kumar Patel 4,
Ranjit Sah 12, Alfonso J Rodriguez-Morales 13,14, Balasubramanian Ganesh 15,
Prashant Kumar 16 and Raj Kumar Singh 17
3 Laboratory for Structural Bioinformatics, Biosystems Dynamics Research Center, Riken 250-0047, Japan;
11 Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Immunology, College of Veterinary Sciences, UP Pandit Deen
Dayal Upadhayay Pashu Chikitsa Vigyan Vishwavidyalay Evum Go-Anusandhan Sansthan (DUVASU),
13 Public Health and Infection Research Group, Faculty of Health Sciences, Universidad Tecnologica de
14 Grupo de Investigacion Biomedicina, Faculty of Medicine, Fundacion Universitaria Autonoma de las
Americas, Pereira, Risaralda 660003, Colombia
Tel.: +91-5812302777 (Y.S.M.); Fax: +91-5812301757 (Y.S.M.)
Abstract: The technology-driven world of the 21st century is currently confronted with a major threat
to humankind, represented by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, caused by the severe
acute respiratory syndrome, coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2). As of now, COVID-19 has affected more
than 6 million confirmed cases and took 0.39 million human lives. SARS-CoV-2 spreads much faster
than its two ancestors, SARS-CoV and Middle East respiratory syndrome-CoV (MERS-CoV), but
has low fatality rates. Our analyses speculate that the efficient replication and transmission of SARSCoV-2 might be due to the high-density basic amino acid residues, preferably positioned in close
proximity at both the furin-like cleavage sites (S1/S2 and S2’) within the spike protein. Given the
high genomic similarities of SARS-CoV-2 to bat SARS-like CoVs, it is likely that bats serve as a
reservoir host for its progenitor. Women and children are less susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection,
while the elderly and people with comorbidities are more prone to serious clinical outcomes, which
may be associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and cytokine storm. The
cohesive approach amongst researchers across the globe has delivered high-end viral diagnostics.
However, home-based point-of-care diagnostics are still under development, which may prove
transformative in current COVID-19 pandemic containment. Similarly, vaccines and therapeutics
noteworthy advancements, focusing on the etiological viral agent, comparative genomic analysis,
population susceptibility, disease epidemiology and diagnosis, animal reservoirs, laboratory animal
models, disease transmission, therapeutics, vaccine challenges, and disease mitigation measures.
Keywords: Coronavirus; pandemic; SARS-CoV-2; COVID-19; pathobiology; diagnosis; vaccines;
The ongoing global threat, declared a pandemic by international health agencies, originated
from a newly emerging coronavirus (CoV), designated as severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) [1]. A live animal market in the Hubei Province of Wuhan in Mainland
China was identified as the first epicenter of the pandemic [2]. Initially, an outbreak was suspected
when a cluster of patients was admitted to local health care facilities with complaints of fever, cough,
dyspnea, and fatigue, resembling symptoms common to viral pneumonia [3]. The first case of
Consequently, a cluster of patients reported respiratory illness to the local health care facilities, and
on December 30th, 2019, the Chinese National Health Commission (CNHC) suspected an outbreak of
pneumonia of unknown etiology in Wuhan. With the increasing number of cases in neighboring
countries and other areas worldwide, the disease spread to several countries worldwide and it was
declared a Public Health Emergency of International Concern by the World Health Organization
boundaries and affected more than 215 countries and a few international conveyances, which led the
WHO to declare COVID-19 as a pandemic on March 11th, 2020 [4].
As of May 21st, 2020, 4,893,186 cases have been reported, with 323,256 deaths, of which 1,501,876
confirmed cases and 90,203 deaths were from the United States of America, followed by Brazil
(271,628; 17,971), the United Kingdom (248,297; 35,704), Spain (232,555; 27,888), Italy (227,364; 32,330),
France (141,312; 28,081), and China (84,507; 4645) [5]. Notably, all age groups show susceptibility to
SARS-CoV-2 infection, from newborns to the elderly [6]. The average age noted for SARS-CoV-2
infection susceptibility is 55.5 years, while that for the case fatality rates (CFRs) is 75 years [7,8].
However, the CFR varies among different age groups and is highest (14.8%) among the elderly (>80
years of age). The incidences and CFR are reportedly higher in males (67.67% and 2.8%, respectively)
than in females, owing to the higher frequency of engagement in outdoor activities and smoking
status in males [9]. Immunocompromised individuals and patients with comorbidities are at a higher
risk. The most common reported comorbidities in COVID-19 cases include cardiovascular diseases
(10.5%), diabetes (7.3%), chronic respiratory infections (6.3%), hypertension (6%), and malignancies
(5.6%) [8]. As per the WHO observations, the COVID-19 epidemic peaked and plateaued between
January 23rd and February 2nd, 2020, in China, and then followed a declining trend, paving a path for
the elimination of the epidemic. However, the WHO has simultaneously stated that other countries
are reporting a continuous increase in the number of cases, with the USA reporting the highest
increase in daily deaths.
starting from the first report of novel CoV from Wuhan, China—including the declaration of COVID19 as a worldwide pandemic by the WHO, and the situation as of June 7, 2020—have been depicted
in the timeline format.
The definitive origin of SARS-CoV-2 remains undetermined. However, initial estimations
implicate Wuhan as the epicenter and the live animal seafood market as the source of this outbreak,
owing to the involvement of different animals, including wild and domestic animals, in close
proximity to each other [10]. The postulation was primarily based on the significant genomic
similarity between SARS-CoV-2 and bat or pangolin CoVs. The first patient to be reported in Wuhan
did not visit the seafood market, and molecular analyses of SARS-CoV-2 genomic sequences suggest
its origin is traced back to late November [11,12]. These findings raised specific questions pertinent
to the COVID-19 epidemic and the Wuhan seafood market. The well-established human transmission
of the outbreak emphasizes the likelihood of the better adaptability of the virus in transmission
dynamics [3,11,13].
The events leading to the emergence of a virus capable of infecting a new host have occurred
previously in CoV infections [14]. Earlier, reports suggested the emergence of SARS-CoV by a
recombination between bat SARS-like CoVs, followed by mutations in civet CoVs prior to its
spillover. Similarly, the Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS)-CoV also circulated and acquired
mutations in camels for approximately 30 years before the incidence of MERS in the Middle East
[15,16], indicating the adaptation of CoVs to different hosts before their spillover to humans [17].
SARS-CoV-2 is suggested to be a chimera of two different viruses, a bat-CoV (RaTG13) and a
pangolin-CoV [18].
Researchers have put forth their best efforts in developing effective treatments and vaccine
candidates, and have succeeded to a significant extent in identifying several repurposed drugs,
monoclonal therapeutic antibodies, and vaccine candidates. However, many such treatment options
are in the different stages of pre-clinical and clinical development. To date, no approved, specific
progress made in the measures for the resolution of the COVID-19 pandemic, using virus genomic
analysis, the assessment of global epidemiological trends, transmission patterns, the present-day
status of therapeutics, and public health preparedness plans for controlling the wider dissemination
of the disease.
2. Previous Human CoV Epidemics
Usually, infections caused by the Betacoronaviruses are mild to asymptomatic [19,20]. Since the
first report of CoV in the 1960s, humans have been affected by CoV infection. To date, six strains of
CoVs, causing mild to severe respiratory illnesses in humans, have been identified [21]. Of these, four
CoVs (HCoV-NL63, HCoV-229E, HCoV-OC43, and HCoV-HKU1) cause mild symptoms in humans.
Contrarily, two highly pathogenic CoVs caused outbreaks of severe respiratory illness due to
zoonotic transmission in humans, namely the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and MERS.
The first incidence of SARS-CoV infection was reported on November 16th, 2002, in the coastal
Guangdong province of southeast China bordering Hong Kong and Macau. This infection spread
across 31 countries at a moderate speed. The virus was predicted to originate from bats and civet cats
A winter season predilection was also noted in the pattern of this epidemic. After adopting strict
public health measures, consisting of quarantine and the lockdown of air traffic, the disease was
finally contained by July 5th, 2003 [22]. During this period, SARS-CoV infected 8422 humans and
caused 916 deaths at a CFR of 10.87%. Since then, SARS has phased out, and the outbreak was
Since the first occurrence of MERS in Saudi Arabia in June 2012, sporadic cases are still reported,
primarily in the Arabian Peninsular region, and MERS has spread to more than 27 countries
worldwide. Notably, the CFR in MERS is the highest (34.77%) among all CoVs. To date, it has infected
2496 humans with the deaths of 868 patients. The disease was reported in Saudi Arabia, the UAE and
in individuals with a travel history to the Arabian Peninsular countries. The source of viral origin
was traced to bats, and camels were the intermediate hosts for the virus, which followed animal-tohuman (zoonotic disease) and human-to-human modes of virus transmission [19,23].
(SARS-CoV-2, MERS-CoV, and SARS-CoV).
Causative agent
Incubation period
The median age of
infected human cases
Source of origin
Bats, civet cats
Bats, camel
Seafood, bats, pangolin
Zoonotic disease
Zoonotic disease
Zoonotic disease
Speed of spread
Seasonal occurrence
Place of Origin
Guangdong, China
Jeddah, Saudi
Wuhan, China
First incidence
The last case reported
and present status
Total number of cases
1,434,426 as of 8th April,
Overall fatality
(as of now)
82,220 (5.73%) as of 8th
No. Countries
Intermediate host
Paguma larvata
Camelus dromedaries
Pangolin, Mink (possible)
Definitive host
Rhinolophus sinicus
Pipistrellus hesperidus
Rhinolophus affinis
Genome length
Major Regional
Guangdong province of
southern China, and
later to western pacific
Saudi Arabia,
followed by UAE
Hubei, especially, Wuhan
in China, followed by
Glucocorticoid and
No effective
approved treatment
or vaccine
The first case of SARS-CoV-2 infection was reported in the first week of December 2019 in
Wuhan City, Hubei Province, China. Using deep sequencing methods, the causative agent for this
deadly pandemic was identified as a new member of the Betacoronavirus genus [24,25]. The newly
identified CoV had an 82% sequence identity with the human SARS-CoV [26]. It was initially
designated as 2019-novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV). Later, the International Committee on Taxonomy
of Viruses officially named it as the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2),
owing to its significant genetic relatedness to SARS-CoV. Subsequently, the WHO named the disease
caused by SARS-CoV-2 as coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19) on February 11th, 2020, as shown in
3. SARS-CoV-2 Taxonomy, Structure, and Genomics
SARS-CoV-2 belongs to the family Coronaviridae, subfamily Orthocoronavirinae, under the order
Nidovirales. The Orthocoronavirinae subfamily consists of four genera, namely Alphacoronavirus,
Betacoronavirus, Gammacoronavirus, and Deltacoronavirus [27]. SARS-CoV-2 is a Betacoronavirus.
Betacoronaviruses are further subdivided into five subgenera, namely Embecovirus, Hibecovirus,
Merbecovirus, Nobecovirus, and Sarbecovirus. Phylogenetically, it forms a discrete lineage within the
subgenus of the Sarbecovirus [28]. CoVs, as their name suggests, have a crown-shaped appearance, as
observed under the electron microscope, owing to the spikes on the surface of the virion.
SARS-CoV-2 is a 0.12 µm, enveloped, non-segmented virus, and its genome comprises a singlestranded positive-sense RNA (+ssRNA) of ≈29.8 kb [29,30]. The genome is arranged in a structure
typical to coronaviruses in the following order: 5′-ORF1a/ab-Spike (S)-Envelope (E)-Membrane (M)Nucleocapsid (N)−3′; however, it lacks the hemagglutinin–esterase gene, similar to bat SARS-likeCoVs, human SARS-CoVs, and MERS-CoVs. Fourteen open reading frames (ORFs) have been
identified that encode twenty-seven proteins, both structural and non-structural proteins (nsps). At
the 5’ terminus, the first ORF1a/ab, which occupies approximately two-thirds of the entire genome
length, encodes the pp1a and pp1ab proteins, respectively, and both collectively comprise 15 nonstructural proteins (nsp 1 to 10 and nsp 12 to 16). The functions of the nsps of a typical coronavirus
encode at least four major structural proteins: the spike (S), matrix membrane (M), envelope (E), and
nucleocapsid (N) proteins. Besides, accessory proteins (3a, 6, 7a, 7b, 8, and 10) are also encoded by
the genome of SARS-CoV-2 Wuhan HU1. The 5′- and 3′- UTR sequences of SARS-CoV-2 have ≈83.0%
nucleotide identity with other members of the Betacoronavirus genus. The genomes of SARS-CoV,
SARS-CoV-2, and bat-SARS CoV are considerably similar. The RNA secondary structures in the 5′UTR were more identical to those of SARS-CoV than to the bat SARS-like CoV; however, the 3′-UTR
was more conserved compared to other related Betacoronaviruses [26].
A detailed comparative genomic organization of important and related Betacoronavirus
sequence homology of SARS-CoV-2 with MERS-CoV is lower (50–51.8%) than that with SARS-CoV
(79%) [32]. Phylogenetically, SARS-CoV-2 is most similar to the bat SARS-like-CoVZC45 concerning
present in SARS-CoV-2, whereas these are absent in bat SARS-like CoVZC45. Compared to SARSCoV, the sequence for 8a is absent in the SARS-CoV-2 genome; the sequence for 3b is shorter, while
that for 8b has an extra 73 amino acids in SARS-CoV-2 [29]. The spike protein-encoding gene in SARSCoV-2 (1273 amino acids) is longer than those of bat SARS-like-CoVZC45 (1246 amino acids) and
SARS-CoV Tor2 (1255 amino acids). Certain accessory proteins, such as the 6 and 7b proteins of SARSCoV Tor2, are similar to those in SARS-CoV-2, except for a marginal variation in protein length, as
including a longer spike protein (1353 amino acids), compared to those in SARS-CoV-2. In
comparison to SARS-CoV-2, bovine CoV ENT has the longest spike protein (1363 amino acids) and a
unique hemagglutinin–esterase gene, while porcine CoV HKU15 (a delta-CoV) has the shortest spike
protein (1159 amino acids) and lacks several accessory proteins. Hence, it would be interesting to
characterize the spike and accessory proteins of SARS-CoV-2 and study the role of these proteins in
the pathogenesis and transmissibility of the virus.
coding regions of beta-CoVs, SARS-CoV-2 Wuhan-HU-1 (NC_045512.2; 29,903 bps), bat SARS-likeCoVZC45 (MG772933.1; 29,802 bps), human SARS-CoV Tor2 (AY274119.3; 29,751 bps), MERS-CoV
EMC (NC_019843.3; 30,119 bps), bovine CoV ENT (NC_003045.1; 31,028 bps), and a delta-CoV, the
porcine CoV HKU15 (NC_039208.1; 25425 bps) are presented. The genomes consist of a 5′
untranslated region (5′ UTR), an open reading frame (ORF 1a/ab) encoding non-structural proteins
(nsps), structural proteins, hemagglutinin–esterase, spike (S), membrane (M), envelope (E), and
nucleocapsid (N) proteins, several accessory proteins, and a 3′ untranslated region (3′ UTR). The
lengths of the ORFs, nsps, and accessory proteins are not drawn to scale.
The trimeric spike (S) glycoprotein, the most important determinant of host cell tropism and
transmission capability, is functionally composed of two subunits, the S1 (receptor binding) and S2
(cell membrane fusion) [33,35]. The S2 subunit of SARS-CoV-2 is comparatively conserved and
closely related to that of bat SARS-like-CoVZC45, while the S1 subunit had only 70% identity with
that of bat SARS-like-CoVZC45 [26,34]. During infection, the S protein is proteolytically processed by
host cell proteases at the S1/S2 cleavage site and, following cleavage, the S protein is cleaved into the
N-terminal S1 subunit and C-terminal S2 subunit. The S1 subunit comprises a signal peptide, an Nterminal domain, and a receptor-binding domain (RBD). In contrast, the S2 subunit comprises a
conserved fusion peptide, a second proteolytic site (S2’), followed by an internal fusion peptide,
heptad repeats 1 and 2, a transmembrane domain, and a cytoplasmic domain [36]. The cleaved S
a second cleavage (at the S2’ cleavage site) occurs for membrane fusion, mediated by the
endolysosomal proteases [33]. Since furin is highly expressed in the lungs, the furin-like cleavage
sites (S1/S2 and S2’) appear to be critical for the activation of the S protein and, therefore, for the
efficient entry of virus [36,39]. On comparing these sites, we observed a typical furin-like cleavage
However, the S2’ cleavage site patterns (XKPXKRSF) in all three viruses were considerably similar.
Similarly, furin might cleave the MERS-CoV EMC spike protein less efficiently at the S2’
cleavage site, owing to the lack of typical basic amino acid residues observed in SARS-CoV-2, bat
SARS-like-CoVZC45, and human SARS-CoV Tor2. Although the S1/S2 cleavage site in the bovine
CoV ENT (KRRSRRSITT) spike protein is rich in basic amino acids, its S2’ cleavage site (NKVSSRSA)
a monobasic cleavage site (NSTENNRFTTT), which could lead to low-efficiency cleavage. Based on
the findings from these comparative studies, we speculate that the high-density basic amino acid
residues, preferably positioned in close proximity at both cleavage sites (S1/S2 and S2’), might have
facilitated the efficient replication and transmission of SARS-CoV-2. However, these propositions
need to be validated by further experimental investigations.
cleavage sites of SARS-CoV-2 spike proteins (S1/S2 and S’ protease cleavage sites) and their
comparison with those in other coronaviruses. The superimposition of the receptor-binding domain
(RBDs) of SARS-CoV-2 (pdb: 6VSB) on (B) human SARS-CoV (pdb: 2AJF), (C) MERS-CoV (pdb:
4KR0), (D) BtCoV-HKU4 (pdb: 4QZV), and (E) HCoV-NL63 (pdb: 3KBH). (F) The superimposition of
the RBDs of porcine respiratory CoV (pdb: 4F5C) on HCoV-NL63 (pdb: 3KBH). RMSD: Root Mean
Square Deviation. UCSF Chimera was used for the superposition and visualization of the RBDs of the
different CoVs [40].
4. CoV Receptors
Host cell receptors and viral surface glycoprotein/ligand binding serve as the most important
determinants of host range, cross-species transmission, and antiviral targeting inventions [41,42]. As
CoVs from four genera recognize at least five different receptors and, therefore, exhibit an intricate
host receptor recognition pattern. The differential usage of host receptors by different CoVs indicates
the structural diversity in the RBDs of the S glycoprotein. However, CoV infections in humans are
primarily driven by interactions between the envelope-anchored spike glycoprotein (S protein) of
CoV and the host cell receptor, the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) [43,44,45]. Viruses from
the same genus can recognize different receptors (for example, SARS-ACE2 and MERS-DPP4), while
CoVs from different genera can bind to the same receptor as well, such as ACE-2 (HCoV-NL63 and
SARS). The key features of the external subdomain of RBDs need to be investigated further to
elucidate their role in receptor usage, transmission, and the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2.
N-acetyl-9-O-acetylneuraminic acid
α2,3-linked sialic acid (attachment factor)
5. SARS-CoV-2 Persistence/Susceptibility on Different Surfaces
With the exponential increment in SARS-CoV-2 cases globally, the non-availability of effective
and specific antiviral treatment, and the lack of specific vaccines, the primary focus has been on
minimizing contact with infected persons, asymptomatic carriers, or contaminated surfaces to
on different contaminated surfaces that we commonly come into contact with daily. SARS-CoV-2 has
been shown to persist in aerosols for up to three hours, with a decline in the infectious virus titer
from 103.5 to 102.7 TCID50 per liter of air [46]. Meanwhile, SARS-CoV-2 was found to be retained more
stably on plastic and stainless steel and could retain infectivity for up to 72 hours when present on
these contaminated surfaces. However, the infective titer reduced significantly from 103.7 to 100.6
TCID50 on plastic surfaces and from 103.7 to 100.6 TCID50 on stainless steel surfaces. On copper surfaces,
both SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV-1 were rendered non-viable after four and eight hours, whereas on
cardboard surfaces, no viable viruses were detected after 24 and 8 hours, respectively [46]. Other
CoVs, such as MERS-CoV, remained viable for up to 48 hours on plastic and stainless steel surfaces
[47]. A limited number of low pathogenicity human CoVs, such as the HCoV-229E and HCoV-OC43,
were found to be viable from 2-9 hours up to six days on different surfaces, such as aluminum, glass,
plastic, PVC, silicon rubber, latex gloves, ceramic, and Teflon [48–50].
Owing to the significant number of COVID-19 cases worldwide, and the lack of effective
remedies for this disease, the WHO is constantly endorsing and promoting better personal hygiene
practices. Social and physical distancing, as well as self-isolation, are recommended to contain the
spread of the virus. Therefore, the WHO recommended two hand rub formulations based on ethanol
and 2-propanol [51]. Such alcohol-based hand rub formulations were found to be effective in
inactivating SARS-CoV-2 [52].
6. Phylogenomic Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 and Related CoVs
We analyzed the spike gene sequences (n = 38) of SARS-CoV-2, which were retrieved from the
NCBI database. The spike gene sequences of CoVs, representing different subgenera of
Betacoronavirus, including SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, were also retrieved. Based on the BLASTn
analysis, certain strains, similar to bat SARS-like-CoVs and bat-CoVs, were also included in this
analysis. The nucleotide and amino acid percentage similarities between these CoVs were calculated
using the MegAlign software from DNASTAR. The phylogenetic analyses of spike genes from
different CoVs were conducted using the GTR + G substitution model and the Maximum Composite
The whole-genome sequence of SARS-CoV-2 derived from isolates from different countries
showed a high similarity of 99 to 100% at both nucleotide and amino acid levels, suggesting the
stability of the viral genome. To determine the similarity index between SARS-CoV-2 and other
members of Betacoronavirus, we analyzed the spike protein sequences of all subgenera. The reference
SARS-CoV-2 strain (Wuhan-Hu-1/NC_045512) was closely associated with a bat-CoV (RaTG13) from
Yunnan, China, with 93.1 and 97.67% nucleotide and amino acid sequence similarity, respectively, as
89.78% in nucleotide and amino acid sequences with the reference strain, respectively. Besides, two
bat SARS-like-CoVs (bat-SL-CoVZC45/MG772933 and bat-SL-CoVZXC21/MG772934) were also
The clustering of SARS-CoV-2 with the bat and pangolin CoVs provided evidence of its possible
origin from these animals. Another member of the subgenus Sarbecovirus, SARS-CoV, was distantly
(NC_045512, Wuhan-Hu-1) with other members of Betacoronavirus (subgenus—Sarbecovirus).
Strain Name /
Accession number
Sequence Identity
Sequence Identity
(a)Whole Genome-Based Comparison (29.9kb)
South Korea
(b) Spike Protein-Based Comparison (~3800 bases)
Pangolin CoV
BtRs-BetaCoV/ YN2018C/
Based on the spike gene phylogenetic analysis, it was observed that SARS-CoV-2 originating
from different countries formed a separate clade with other members of Sarbecovirus. It was found
that the bat-CoV (RaTG13/MN996532), pangolin-CoV (MP789/MT084071), and two bat SARS-likeCoVs (bat-SL-CoVZC45/MG772933 and bat-SL-CoVZXC21/MG772934) closely clustered with SARSCoV-2, while other bat-CoVs and SARS-CoVs clustered within the Sarbecovirus subgenus clade, as
Hibecovirus and Nobecovirus, human and camel MERS-CoV belonging to Merbecovirus, and human,
canine, bovine, and equine CoVs belonging Embecovirus subgenera, clustered separately, as shown in
included SARS-CoV-2 originating from China, the USA, Australia, Japan, and South Korea. Different
subgenera of Betacoronaviruses have been labeled with different colors according to the color legend
on the left side of the tree. Major species of each subgenus have been depicted in front of each clade.
7. Epidemiology of SARS-CoV-2 Infection
The Wuhan seafood market in China was implicated as the epicenter of the COVID-19
pandemic, and China was marked as the index country. Seven cases of pneumonia of unknown
etiology were reported in Wuhan from December 8th to 18th, 2019. The first cluster of such patients
was identified on December 21st, 2019. Pneumonia of unknown etiology is defined as an illness
without an identified causative pathogen that fulfills the following criteria: fever (≥ 38 °C),
radiographic evidence of pneumonia, low or average white-cell count or low lymphocyte count, and
no symptomatic improvement after antimicrobial treatment for 3 to 5 days following standard clinical
guidelines [11,54]. The patients presented with a severe acute respiratory infection and some
developed acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and associated complications [55].
Information about the mode of transmission of SARS-CoV-2 is continuously evolving.
Transmission primarily occurs via the person-to-person route through respiratory droplets (>5-10 µm
in diameter) and fomites. Droplet infection is associated mainly with coughing, sneezing, and talking
to an infected person, and the virus is transmitted to humans through direct contact with mucus
membranes. Transmission can also occur by touching an infected surface, followed by contact with
eyes, nose, or mouth. The travel range of the droplets is less than six feet (approximately two meters),
and these are not retained in the air for long. Satisfactory evidence of the airborne transmission of
SARS-CoV-2 remains unavailable [46]. Although clinically infected patients readily transmit the virus
[14], asymptomatic infected patients can also transmit the virus, and therefore, these carriers should
be tested to effectively contain the spread [11,56,57].
There is evidence of intestinal infection from SARS-CoV-2, and subsequent excretion through
feces [56,58]. In China, out of ten pediatric COVID-19 patients without respiratory symptoms, eight
were positive for fecal SARS-CoV-2 shedding; however, the nasopharyngeal samples from these
subjects tested negative for the virus [59]. These findings were further supported by a study in which
the virus was successfully cultured from feces samples [59,60]. However, there have been no reports
of fecal–oral transmission of SARS-CoV-2 to date. Some reports suggest SARS-CoV-2 transmission
through semen and the infection of SARS-CoV-2 in newborns; however, there is no evidence for
vertical transmission or intrauterine infection in a COVID-19 patient during the late pregnancy stage
7.2. Incubation Period
The incubation period for SARS-CoV-2 infection ranged from 2 to 14 days in human-to-human
transmission, while, in some cases, it extended up to 24 days [57]. However, a median incubation
period of 5-6 days has recently been reported by the WHO [61].
7.3. Basic Reproduction Number (R0)
The basic reproduction number plays a pivotal role in infectious disease epidemiology and
indicates the risk a pathogen carries with respect to its spread. In other words, R0 provides
information about the transmissibility of a virus and represents the number of new infections
originating from an infected individual in a population. A recent comparison of different studies on
the estimation of R0 for COVID-19 revealed that the estimated mean R0 for COVID-19 is 3.28, with a
median of 2.79, which is higher than the WHO estimate of 1.95 [62]. However, considerable variability
was noted, owing to the use of different methods, insufficient data, and the short onset time of the
7.4. Population Susceptibility
There is no age limit for vulnerability to SARS-CoV-2 infection. However, cases with higher
morbidity and chances of mortality have been reported in older adults. Individuals above 65 years of
age or those who have comorbidities (such as hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and
respiratory system diseases) are highly susceptible to the infection [25]. Women are less susceptible
to SARS-CoV-2 infection than men and this is possibly due to different innate immunity, and factors
related to sex chromosomes in women [63]. For example, the biallelic expression of TLR7 in women
allows higher immune responses, while the immune regulatory genes encoded by X chromosomes
cause comparatively less virus load and inflammation. Recently, studies have shown that SARS-CoV2 infection in children (though less severely affected), may develop the Kawasaki disease-like forms
[64]. However, it is still not clear whether Kawasaki disease-like forms are a result of SARS-CoV-2
infection alone or just SARS-CoV-2 induced aggravations in Kawasaki disease patients.
7.5. Global Scenario
COVID-19 has affected almost every country across the globe. On December 31st, 2019, an
“urgent notice on the treatment of pneumonia of unknown cause” was issued to the Wuhan
Municipal Health Center. The market premises were disinfected, and the stallholders were instructed
to wear masks. Till January 3rd, 2020, 44 case-patients with pneumonia of unknown etiology were
reported to the WHO from China, although the cause was not identified. On January 7th, 2020, the
June 7, 2020, COVID-19 distribution was seen globally with large number of confirmed cases and
regions. Six regions have been described by the WHO where the COVID-19 disease is present and are
depicted on the map along with confirmed cases and deaths represented as of June 7, 2020.
Between January 13th to 20th, 2020, Thailand (the first country after China to report a case), Japan,
China CDC identified three different strains of this virus, confirming the mutation of the original
virus. Six deaths were reported in Wuhan, of which four patients had underlying comorbidities [66].
Between January 22nd and 25th, Macau, Hong Kong, Nepal, France, Australia, Malaysia, and
Canada confirmed their first cases. As in China, the WHO assessed the risk to be significantly high
at both regional and global levels. On January 30th, 2020, the International Health Regulations
Emergency Committee, WHO declared the outbreak as a public health emergency of international
concern. Later on, the WHO named the virus as SARS-CoV-2, and the disease was named COVID-19
(coronavirus disease 2019). Thus far, SARS-CoV-2 has affected essentially all countries in the world,
infected millions of people, and killed hundreds of thousands of people [67].
7.6. Socio-Economic Impact
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in the imposition of international travel restrictions in
several countries, the cancellation of major sporting events, and the lockdown of borders, and has
universities worldwide (March 10th, UNESCO). The stock markets and crude oil prices have declined
severely, possibly the most drastic occurrence in recent years. Industries related to entertainment,
ceremonial activities, hotels, and tourism are also affected. It is estimated that the global GDP loss is
within the range of 1.0 to 2.7 trillion US dollars. The lockdown and other associated restrictions have
severely affected the economic status and the well-being of families and communities. The major
sectors affected by this outbreak are health, education, manufacturing, transportation, and trade,
among others.
8. Clinical Profile
CoVs include viruses infecting humans and other animal species, such as birds, camels, cattle,
bats, and cats. CoVs primarily affect the upper and lower respiratory tracts, and the enteric, hepatic,
and neurological systems, with infections characterized by severe dyspnea and hypoxemia, renal
dysfunction with lower urine output, tachycardia, altered mental status, and functional alterations of
organs in animals and humans. Individuals infected with SARS-CoV-2 may be asymptomatic carriers
or active patients with the clinical presentation of symptoms, such as fever, fatigue, dry cough,
myalgia, dyspnea, severe respiratory distress syndrome, and acute cardiac injury [57,68,69]. There
are three types of ARDS: mild, moderate, and severe ARDS. An increase in body temperature up to
39.0 °C (102.2 °F), accompanied by coarse breathing sounds from both lungs at auscultation are
common clinical symptoms. Symptoms, such as headache, sputum production, hemoptysis, diarrhea,
and pleuritic chest pain were also observed in rare cases. The infection more commonly affects people
with cardiopulmonary or renal diseases, and pregnant females, infants, and the elderly (at a two-fold
greater risk than the general population). There is no evidence to suggest greater susceptibility among
children. Pregnant women are at greater risk for viral infections, as suggested by data from previous
outbreaks; therefore, it is advisable to avoid contact with infected individuals [70].
9. Clinical Pathology and Immunopathobiology
9.1. Clinical Pathology
Based on the time of occurrence and intensity of symptoms, the infection has been categorized
into three stages; mild, severe, and critical stage [71,72]. In the mild stage, mild pneumonia/no
pneumonia develops, although symptoms of upper respiratory tract viral infection, marked by mild
fever, dry cough, sore throat, nasal congestion, malaise, headache, and muscle pain, prevail [73]. In
severely affected patients, the rate of respiration is above 30/min due to dyspnea, respiratory
symptoms, such as cough and shortness of breath, or tachypnea, and oxygen saturation in the blood
below 93%, indicating hypoxia, and these developments are observed within a time period of 24–48
hours. The critical stage is marked by symptoms, such as severe pneumonia, septic shock, respiratory
failure, cardiac arrest, and/ or multiple organ failure, which may eventually lead to the death of the
patient [74,75].
Radiological images indicate that two to five lobes of the lungs may be affected. The most
common and pronounced lesions are marked by patchy ground-glass opacities and patchy
consolidation in the mid, external, and sub-pleural areas of the lung [76]. A chest radiograph,
computer tomographic (CT) scan, and/or lung ultrasound indicate the presence of bilateral opacities
[55,77,78]. Thoracic CT scan imaging depicted bilateral ground-glass opacity and bilateral multiple
lobular and sub-segmental areas of consolidation [79–81]. The pathological image of a COVID-19
patient presented bilateral diffuse alveolar damage with cellular fibromyxoid exudates. The
cytopathic effects were marked by the presence of interstitial mononuclear inflammatory infiltrates,
with a majority of lymphocytes and multinucleated syncytial cells, along with atypical enlarged
pneumocytes containing large nuclei and amphophilic granular cytoplasm, in the intra-alveolar
spaces. In some infected patients, microvascular steatosis and mild lobular and portal activity were
recorded in hepatic tissues, while interstitial mononuclear inflammatory infiltrates were found in the
cardiac tissues [8].
Existing literature documents that patients suffering from severe SARS-CoV-2 infection might
suffer from the cytokine storm syndrome that could eventually lead to death [82,83]. In a viral
infection, cell-mediated immunity is triggered to overcome the infection; however, owing to the
overproduction of cytokines, interferons, and other factors, such events can have drastic effects in
certain patients [84]. Evidently, respiratory failure due to the ARDS is the leading cause of mortality,
and, apart from this, secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis is also induced in a limited
number of adult COVID-19 patients. Usually, it is one of the less-recognized syndromes characterized
by hyperinflammatory, hyperferritinemia, fulminant and lethal hypercytokinemia, cytopenias,
coagulopathy, and thrombocytopenia, along with multiple organ failure. The severely affected group
of COVID-19 patients presented with a marked increase in the levels of plasma pro-inflammatory
cytokines, interleukin (IL)-2, IL-7, macrophage inflammatory protein 1-α, granulocyte colony-
stimulating factor, tumor necrosis factor-α, interferon-γ inducible protein 10, and monocyte
chemoattractant protein 1. Mortality in COVID-19 could be attributed to such hyperinflammatory
reactions [82,85].
Clinical laboratory findings suggested leucopenia (white blood cell count less than 2.91 × 109/l)
and lymphopenia (lymphocyte count less than 1.0 × 109/l), high erythrocyte sedimentation rate,
altered myocardial zymogram with elevated levels of lactate dehydrogenase and creatinine kinase,
increased levels of alanine aminotransferase or aspartate aminotransferase as indicators of irregular
liver function, a rise in hypersensitive troponin I (hs-cTnI) as a sign of virus-induced heart tissue
damage, and a marked increase in the concentration of serum C-reactive protein and D-dimer,
hyperbilirubinemia, and acidosis [3,24].
Studies on the pathogenesis of COVID-19 have not been undertaken thus far; however,
understanding the mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV may help
delineate key factors associated with COVID-19 pathogenesis. Once the virus enters the cells through
a specific interaction between the S protein and ACE-2, the antigen-presenting cells are likely to
process the viral proteins through the major histocompatibility complex (MHC or human leukocyte
antigen in humans). Following the MHC antigen presentation of SARS-CoV-2, both humoral and
cellular immunity are activated, mediated by the antibody-producing B cells and virus-specific T
lymphocytes. The seroconversion in COVID-19 patients was observed to occur at a similar point or
slightly earlier than in SARS-CoV infection [86,87]. A recently released antibody profile against SARSCoV-2 has indicated that the seroconversion rates for antibodies, IgM, and IgG were 93.1% (161/173),
82.7% (143/173), and 64.7% (112/173), respectively [88]. Studies on cellular immunity against SARSCoV-2 are limited. A recent study reported a significant reduction in the levels of CD4 and CD8 T
cells in the peripheral blood of SARS-CoV-2-infected patients [89]. Studies on COVID-19-recovered
patients can help significantly in elucidating the role of specific memory T cell-mediated immune
responses against SARS-CoV-2.
Increasing evidence suggests that fatalities resulting from SARS-CoV-2 infection could be
primarily attributed to the ARDS [90,91], which may be associated with comorbidities and followed
by multiple organ failure, leading to death [92]. ARDS is an immunopathological feature common to
SARS-CoV-1, MERS-CoV, and the more recent SARS-CoV-2 infections [89,93]. ARDS occurs
primarily in response to the cytokine storm, the fatal uncontrolled systemic inflammatory response,
resulting from the release of an excess quantity of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-6, IL-1β, IL-2, IL8, IL-17, G-CSF, GM-CSF, IP10, MCP1, MIP1α, and TNF) from immune effector cells during SARSCoV-2 infection [91,93–98]. In this context, the increased levels of IL-6 were considered a reliable
indicator of poor prognosis in the severe stage of the disease [98]. The cytokine storm triggers a severe
attack by the immune system on the lung and the body, inducing ARDS and multiple organ failure,
and finally leading to death in severe cases of SARS-CoV-2 infections, similar to that in SARS-CoV
and MERS-CoV infections [89,94]. A recent study also supported the proposition that SARS-CoV-2
acts on lymphocytes and leads to a cytokine storm and a series of immune dysregulation events in
the body [94,95,97].
10. Animal Reservoirs
The identification of animal reservoirs or intermediate host(s) and the evolution of SARS-CoV2 is critical to our understanding of the molecular mechanism underlying interspecies transfer, and
hence, devising effective control measures to prevent its further spread.
The preliminary whole-genome analyses of SARS-CoV-2 denoted a high genetic identity (96.2%)
with a bat (BetaCoV/bat/Yunnan/RaTG13/2013) virus, detected in Rhinolophus affinis in the Yunnan
province of China [99], leading to speculation that bats might act as a possible reservoir host. Notably,
the homology modeling studies of RBD of SARS-CoV-2 suggest that it has a structure similar to that
of SARS-CoV RBD, with few differences in the key residues at the amino acid level [33]. Another
study based on synonymous codon usage bias suggested snakes as an intermediate host; however,
this virus has not been detected in any snake species yet [100]. Later on, pangolins were found to be
a potential intermediate host. The recent detection and whole-genome sequence analysis of SARS-
CoV-2 from Malayan pangolins indicated a sequence identity of 85.5 to 92.4% with pangolin SARSCoV-2, which is lower compared to that of bat CoV RaTG13 (96.2%). However, the RBD of the S
protein from pangolin SARS-CoV-2 exhibited 97.4% amino acid similarity to that of SARS-CoV-2,
which is higher compared to that of RaTG13 (89.2%) [101]. Furthermore, the SARS-CoV-2 RBD shares
five identical key residues with that of pangolin-CoV, while it shares only one residue with that of
RaTG13 [101]. This finding suggests that pangolins may act as a potential intermediate host.
However, studies suggesting bats as a reservoir host and pangolins as an intermediate host for SARSCoV-2 need to be investigated further.
Susceptibility in different animals has recently been evaluated through an experiment on SARSCoV-2 infection, where SARS-CoV-2 was found to replicate efficiently in cats and ferrets, while it
replicated poorly in pigs, dogs, chickens, and ducks [102]. Viral transmission via respiratory droplets
was also noted in cats in this study. A dog and a tiger were reported to test positive for SARS-CoV-2
[103]. The gene sequence analysis of the viral isolate from a dog indicates that the dog might have
acquired the infection from infected individuals. These findings suggest low chances of SARS-CoV2 transmission from pet animals to the human population; however, further investigation is
11. Animal Models in SARS-CoV-2 Research
After the SARS outbreak, numerous inbred mouse strains were evaluated as models for the SARSCoV disease with varying levels of results [105,106]. The genetically engineered mouse model, known
as the humanized ACE2, was developed in response to the SARS outbreak. This model could be
infected by SARS-CoV-2 and develop mild pneumonia. The other promising animal models for
SARS-CoV-2 vaccine research could include hamsters and monkeys [107]. Recently, ferrets have been
identified as an infection and transmission animal model for studying SARS-CoV-2. This finding may
facilitate the development of SARS-CoV-2 drugs and vaccines [108].
12. Diagnosis of COVID-19
12.1. Sample Collection
For patients under investigation, the collection of upper respiratory samples (nasopharyngeal
and oropharyngeal swabs) and lower respiratory samples (sputum, if possible) is recommended
irrespective of the presentation. Nasopharyngeal swab, bronchoalveolar lavage, endotracheal
aspirates or wash, oropharyngeal swab, and saliva are the preferred samples. Stool and urine samples
can also be tested to exclude other unidentified modes of transmission [3]. Respiratory samples
should be collected in viral transport medium with antibiotics and antifungals and transported in the
cold chain. Sample collection and packaging have to be conducted using proper personal protective
equipment. The triple packaging of samples is necessary to prevent spillage and should be conducted
in a negative pressure room with Class II Biosafety cabinets to contain transmission. However,
depending upon the available resources, certain modifications can be incorporated in the Standard
Operating Procedures to minimize the risk. Lately, saliva samples have been found to test positive
for SARS-CoV-2 in 91.7% of the symptomatic cases, and a declining trend in viral load has also been
reported. This finding is of immense importance as the collection of saliva is a non-invasive
technique, requiring less stringent conditions, and this can also be used as a screening tool [109].
Zhang et al. used anal swabs in addition to respiratory samples and found a higher number of
positive cases using anal swabs than respiratory swabs, especially in the later stages of infection [60].
12.2. Diagnostic Technologies
Sensitive and specific diagnostic methods are always preferred, especially in the cases of
epidemics or pandemics, for the rapid and accurate diagnosis of viruses. Molecular (RT-PCR) assays
are fast, highly sensitive, and specific, and are gradually replacing conventional methods. According
to data maintained by the Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics (FIND), one of the WHO's
partners for the assessment of diagnostics, at least 143 COVID-19 molecular diagnostic kits are in
(EUA) from regulatory bodies.
Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention
CDC 2019-nCoV Real-Time RTPCR Diagnostic Panel (CDC)
Roche Molecular
Systems, Inc. (RMS)
cobas SARS-CoV-2
Thermo Fisher
Scientific, Inc.
TaqPath COVID-19 Combo Kit
N1, N2 and
RNase P
ORF1ab, E gene,
RNase P
ORF1ab, N gene,
S gene, MS2
USA FDAEUA
USA FDAEUA
USA FDAEUA
Primerdesign Ltd. COVID-19
genesig Real-Time PCR assay
Abbott RealTime SARS-CoV-2
RdRp and N
Xpert Xpress SARS-CoV-2 test
N2 and E genes
DAAN Gene Co., Ltd.
of Sun Yat-sen
Detection Kit for 2019 Novel
Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) RNA
ORF1ab and N
China EUA
Seegene, Inc.
Allplex 2019-nCoV assay
E, RdRp and N
Korea EUA
Primerdesign Ltd.
Abbott Molecular
RdRp gene
USA FDAEUA
USA FDAEUA
USA FDAEUA
The successful limitation of virus spread in Singapore, Taiwan, and Hong Kong,
despite their geographical proximity to China, indicates that widespread and intense testing,
combined with strict quarantine measures for positive and suspected cases, are crucial for combatting
SARS-CoV-2. Large-scale screening is arduous with the currently used molecular tests; therefore,
deployment of rapid point-of-care tests (POCTs) can act as a breakthrough in the current scenario
[111]. In this context, a recent breakthrough in COVID-19 diagnosis was marked by the Xpert® Xpress
SARS-CoV-2 test (an RT-qPCR test) developed in the USA and reported as a rapid diagnostic test that
provides result in 45 minutes. Moreover, it is an automated POCT with EUA from the FDA and
enables the detection of SARS-CoV-2 in the nasal wash, nasopharyngeal swab, and aspirated samples
[112]. The Abbott ID NOW™ COVID-19 test, a rapid point-of-care (POC) PCR isothermal test, which
can deliver results in five minutes, has recently received the EUA from the FDA. Another FDAapproved POC test, a rapid IgM–IgG-combined antibody test for COVID-19, developed by
Biomedomics (Becton Dickinson) can detect antiviral antibodies with 88.7% sensitivity and 90.6%
specificity within 10-15 minutes [113]. These POC tests, which can be used at the community level,
are likely to improve the testing capacities, and hence, would be pivotal in disrupting the SARS-CoV2 transmission cycle. Recently, a CRISPR-based Specific High Sensitivity Enzymatic Reporter
Unlocking (SHERLOCK) technique has been used to diagnose COVID-19 in less than an hour without
using multiple instruments [114]. A study employed the combination of RT-PCR, CRISPR, and
metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 and confirmed
the effective clinical diagnosis of COVID-19 [115].
12.3. Artificial Intelligence in COVID-19 Diagnosis
Artificial intelligence (AI) tools are being tested and applied for preliminary screening of
possible early infections of SARS-CoV-2 among individuals. Based on the AI-based learning
framework, individuals are being categorized as high, moderate, or minimal risk individuals [116].
However, multiple experts differ in their opinion over the data collected by these AI tools, as it is
often considered sensitive, owing to concerns of national security [117].
The chest CT-based diagnosis, usually in COVID-19, has certain limitations in terms of
differentiation between COVID-19 and community-acquired pneumonia. Therefore, a deep learning
model for COVID-19 was developed and employed to distinguish the common community-acquired
pneumonia from COVID-19 [118]. With a lack of point-of-care diagnostics, AI-driven tools can prove
useful in determining the risk involved and the transmission dynamics among different population
groups. Presently, owing to the involvement of active learning processes in AI tools, the rate of
confidence in decision-making processes has increased [28,119]. Therefore, there is an urgent need to
standardize protocols to develop AI-based devices that can be used during such disasters.
13. Vaccines and Therapeutics
13.1. Vaccine Development
The most common preventive and effective approach to decelerate the COVID-19 pandemic is
the use of vaccines in humans. Currently, there are significant research efforts being made globally
to develop safe and effective vaccines against SARS-CoV-2 infection [120]. Approximately 200
vaccine candidates have already been developed worldwide and are at different stages of clinical
evaluation [121]. Most of these vaccine candidates have been developed using at least seven different
of Public Health, USA, provides comprehensive publicly-available information on all drugs and
vaccines against SARS-CoV-2 that are currently being studied.
5 [122]. The potential advantage of such a vaccine is its ability to mimic natural infection to trigger a
more potent immune response and rapid production. The phase I clinical trial has recently
However, the availability of this vaccine for global immunization is likely to take more time as it faces
numerous challenges associated with clinical development, since no previous mRNA vaccine has
been approved. The second vaccine, the Ad5-nCov, a replication-defective adenovirus vector
expressing the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein, has been developed jointly by Cansino Biologics Inc. and
used for the upstream preparation of the recombinant vaccine. The phase I clinical trial of this vaccine
candidate recently commenced at the Tongji Hospital in Wuhan, China [123].
The phase I clinical trials for two other vaccine candidates (BNT-162 and INO-4800) are due in
April 2020 in China and the USA, respectively. The BNT-162, an mRNA vaccine candidate, expressing
jointly developed by Biontech AG, Shanghai Fosun Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd. and Pfizer Inc [13]
(Hodgson, 2020). Another candidate, the INO-4800, a DNA vaccine supported by CELLECTRA®
3PSP, a hand-held smart device for intradermal delivery, developed by Inovio Pharmaceuticals Inc.
and Beijing Advaccine Biotechnology Co. Ltd [13], is undergoing phase I clinical trials. The globally
coordinated efforts to combat SARS-CoV-2 have led to the development of potential vaccine
candidates in the shortest possible time; however, these candidates need to be subjected to rigorous
clinical trials to prove their efficacy and safety before being considered for global immunization.
Therefore, in the current situation, therapeutic drugs are the most effective alternative for the
containment of COVID-19 and restoration of public health. Recently, two more vaccine candidates
A concept of protection through changing the viral genetic code was given by researchers from
China in 2016 while working on influenza A virus. They generated premature termination codons
(PTCs), and these PTC-containing viruses showed promising results in mice, guinea pigs, and ferrets
against influenza challenge. However, such studies have not been replicated further, though in the
hour of need during the COVID-19 crisis, must be evaluated for the beneficial and effective control
of infections.
13.2. Development of Antiviral Therapeutics
The rapid spread of SARS-CoV-2 demands the immediate development of effective and safe
promising approach adopted by researchers is the repurposing of drugs [12,124]. However, no
specific anti-SARS-CoV-2 treatment has been recommended by the US FDA, yet owing to the lack of
supportive data.
Favilavir (Favipiravir), the first antiviral drug tested against SARS-CoV-2, approved by the
National Medical Products Administration of China in February 2020, is commonly used to treat
influenza infection in China and Japan and has shown promising results in shortening the course of
SARS-CoV-2 infection [12,124,125]. This drug acts by inhibiting the RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase activity (RdRp) of SARS-CoV-2. Despite its potential effectiveness, the drug is yet to be
approved by the U.S. FDA. Remdisivir has also been reported to treat COVID-19 patients to full
recovery [126,127]. In fact, remdisivir is also a repurposed drug that was initially developed for the
treatment of Ebola virus infection. Remdisivir is reported to prevent viral replication by the
premature termination of RNA transcription. Currently, remdisivir is under clinical trials for the
treatment of COVID-19 patients. Furthermore, a combination of lopinavir and ritonavir has been
reported to significantly improve the conditions of COVID-19 patients in South Korea [126]. Similar
to remdisivir, a combination of lopinavir and ritonavir was developed to treat HIV-1 infections in
adults. However, the combination of lopinavir and ritonavir failed to serve its initial purpose when
used for the treatment of COVID-19 patients in recent clinical trials in China [128].
Hydroxychloroquine, an anti-malarial drug, in combination with azithromycin, has shown
promising results in an open-label non-randomized clinical trial in reducing the viral load in COVID19 patients [129]. However, its associated side-effects could be more severe in COVID-19 patients
with pre-existing chronic medical conditions.
Apart from these drugs, convalescent plasma therapy (plasma from recovered COVID-19
patients that contains antibodies against SARS-CoV-2) could also be used as an alternative treatment
strategy to improve the survival rate of COVID-19 patients [130]. Recently, the FDA allowed the use
of plasma therapy for critically ill patients under an emergency investigational new drug protocol
(FDA, 2020). The treatment strategies must focus on curbing hyper inflammation, and the existing
readily available therapies may prove beneficial in patients with severe SARS-CoV-2 infection. A
humanized monoclonal antibody, viz. tocilizumab, competitively binds to the IL-6 receptors and
subsequently prevents the binding of IL-6 to its receptor [131]. Notably, the blocking of the IL-6
receptor by tocilizumab may prove to be crucial and reduce the number of deaths associated with
severe stage COVID-19. In this context, a clinical trial (ChiCTR2000029765) using tocilizumab
reported its significant effectiveness in controlling fever and improving the respiratory function in
individuals with severe COVID-19 [98]. Apart from the aforementioned drugs, there are several other
drugs that are either under clinical trials or are being considered for a clinical trial for the treatment
of COVID-19. Of note, the information provided in this study is neither exhaustive nor should be
used for self-medication.
13.3. Challenges of COVID-19 Vaccines and Therapeutics
With the global cohesive approach, dozens of vaccine candidates have reached a status needing
human trials. The human trials can only provide an idea on the status of vaccine effectiveness. The
search for volunteers is a challenge, though in few places a number of people have registered for the
clinical trials. The time estimated for the release of any vaccine looks lengthier, with a waiting period
of nearly 12 months, involving quality checks, regulatory, and scale-up issues, with the required
number of doses covering those who are suffering globally. A few of the candidate vaccines cleared
the animal trials with safe outcome and need an assessment of immune responses and disease
enhancement. Lately, other concerns posing a challenge are higher mutability seen in circulating
strains of SARS-CoV-2 worldwide and the antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) of disease. This
ADE mechanism enables the entry of the virus into the host cells and is well described in viral
infections. “Will the changing virus remain susceptible to the upcoming vaccine?” and “Could it be
helping in ADE?” are the questions yet to be resolved.
clinical trials) for the prevention/treatment of COVID-19.
Vaccines candidates
Clinical trials started at
Kaiser Permanente
Washington Health
Seattle, USA
CanSino Biological
and Beijing
Clinical trials recently
started at Tongji Hospital
in Wuhan, China
Phase I
Shenzhen GenoImmune Medical
Phase I
Shenzhen GenoImmune Medical
Phase I
DNA plasmid encoding S
protein delivered by
Dendritic cells modified
with lentiviral vector and
expressing synthetic
minigene based on
domains of selected viral
Artificial antigenpresenting cells (aAPCs)
modified with lentiviral
vector and expressing
synthetic minigene based
on domains of selected
viral proteins
Drug candidates
Approved by NMPA,
Inhibition of RNAdependent RNA
polymerase of SARS-CoV2
and azithromycin
Gilead Sciences,
Lopinavir + Ritonavir
AbbVie, USA
Clinical trials are
under progress
Clinical trials are
under progress
Further research is
under process
Both have shown in vitro
activity against SARSCoV-2
Developed for treatment
of Ebola virus infection
Developed to treat HIV-1
14. Mitigation Strategies
In the absence of approved antiviral agents and vaccines, the most effective strategies are based
on the disruption of the transmission cycle of the virus (human-to-human) via droplets or close
contact. To achieve this, the most critical step would involve maintaining strict hand hygiene and
adherence to basic cough etiquettes, across all strata from children to the elderly. A study reported
the employment of prevention and control strategies at three levels: case-related population, general
population, and national level [132]. Additionally, the National Health Commission of China issued
protocols for the mitigation of COVID-19 in order to contain the further spread of the virus by a “big
isolation and big disinfection” policy during the Chinese spring festival [133]. A national-level
mitigation strategy has also been adopted for the elderly population and in rural areas [134,135].
Awareness regarding the connotations of hand hygiene amongst the general public, instead of
stressing the usage of masks, is the need of the hour in view of the multiple modes of transmission.
The use of sanitizers or soaps is one of the essential components of the prevention and control of
COVID-19. Sanitizers containing 60-70% ethanol or 70% isopropanol are effective against SARS-CoV2. Similarly, household detergents or soaps are also useful in sanitization. While sanitizers are
sufficient for relatively clean hands, soiled hands need to be washed using soap and water for 20
seconds. Additionally, the WHO issued guidelines on the use of face masks during homecare visits
and in the community, along with health care settings in the context of COVID-19 [136]. Moreover,
the use of particulate respirators, such as certified N95 or FFP2, is recommended for health care
workers who perform aerosol-generating procedures.
In contrast, medical masks are recommended while providing clinical care to suspected or
confirmed COVID-19 cases [136]. The WHO has approved the use of N95 masks for patients at all
times for source control and for healthcare providers only in certain situations, such as when they are
in the close vicinity of a patient (within three feet) or are performing aerosol-generating procedures
on symptomatic patients. These masks are not recommended for use by the general public. In
situations of close contact (within three to six feet) with a suspected or confirmed case, a facemask
ought to be used instead of an N95 or powered air-purifying respirator. If the patient is not using a
facemask, the health care provider should wear an N95 mask, even when at a distance of three to six
feet from the patient. In low-resource outbreak settings, the reuse of N95 masks after ethylene oxide
sterilization may be considered. General public awareness should be increased by the display of
posters with clear “DO’s” and “DON’Ts,” illustrating symptoms, routes of transmission, and
preventive measures, with emphasis on personal hygiene to curtail transmission. Physical and social
distancing campaigns should be promoted to lessen physical contact and to contain the spread. Fitbit
devices and other smartphone fitness devices can be used during such outbreaks to monitor the
symptoms [137,138]. Smartphones and internet services can also be utilized to disseminate
information regarding the presentation and prevention of the infection.
Disposable protective clothing, eye gear, gloves, masks, and shoe covers should be used while
handling animals and animal products, and the same should be restricted to the workplace to prevent
the spread to family members. The consumption of undercooked and raw meat should strictly be
avoided. The proper heating of food to a temperature of 60 °C for thirty minutes, mimicking thermal
shock conditions, a common practice in India, is sufficient to kill the virus. Breath analyzers and other
public sharing equipment should use a disposable mouthpiece to prevent the human-to-human
transfer of the virus. The proper cleaning of all surfaces should be practiced in hospitals, airports, at
workplaces, and in domestic settings to allow for the appropriate action of detergents since SARS-
CoV is an enveloped virus. The virus has been found to persist on inanimate surfaces from two hours
up to nine days at room temperature, depending upon the type of surface. At temperatures of 4 °C,
certain strains remain viable for up to 28 days. Surface disinfection with 0.1% hypochlorite or 62-71%
ethanol was found to be effective in reducing the infectivity of a surface within an exposure time of
one minute [139].
Unfortunately, this is the third event of the spillover of a zoonotic respiratory virus to humans
in this decade of the 21st century, highlighting the necessity of prerequisite multidisciplinary
coordination for curbing the emergence of novel viruses and controlling such apocalyptic events
[140–142]. The “One health approach” is one such initiative that incorporates preventive strategies
for the emergence of zoonosis in all three arms: humans, animals, and the environment [143,144].
WHO initiatives, such as the Battle against Respiratory Viruses (BRaVe), that support innovative
multidisciplinary research in the field of emerging and re-emerging respiratory viruses are
encouraging [145]. Consortiums and open-access platforms, such as ProMed, International Severe
Acute Respiratory and Emerging Infection Consortium, and BioDiaspora, act as benefactors by
partaking in, stipulating, and disseminating comprehensive knowledge on the prevention and
management of such events worldwide.
Travelers from COVID-19 affected countries need to be quarantined appropriately, as they have
been the root cause of spreading SARS-CoV-2 from China to subsequently more than 200 countries.
Measures, such as public awareness programs about COVID-19 associated health risks and how to
avoid contact transmission, issuing updated advisories from time to time, visa cancellations to avoid
travelers coming in from affected countries, understanding the high socio-economic implications of
other public places, staying at home in affected areas during lockdown conditions in countries where
this virus has been severely affected, strengthening medical facilities, adopting high biosafety
measures for doctors, nurses, and health-care workers, along with following high standards of
hygiene and health practices while diagnosing and treating COVID-19 patients, are a few of the
critical prevention and control measures to check the high spread of this pandemic virus.
Because of the current pandemic situation affecting more than 200 countries, as well as the global
threats imposed by SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19, as indicated by the increasing number of cases and
deaths, researchers are working to develop effective vaccines and therapeutics as soon as possible.
Appropriate surveillance, prevention, and control measures are being implemented worldwide,
while taking lessons from earlier virus outbreaks, such as SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, Ebola, Zika, Nipah,
and others, as well as from the advances in science and technology in the modern era, to halt the
further spread of this virus and to restrain COVID-19 [118,146–154].
The emergence of SARS-CoV-2 highlights gaps in the current knowledge about human–animal
barriers and zoonotic diseases, as well as the necessity for a prerequisite for extensive comprehensive
research at the human–animal–environment interface of the One Health concept [155], to determine
the origins and crossroads of interspecies transfer impediment by the identification of the ecological
and evolutionary carriers of the infection. Several questions on SARS-CoV-2 remain unanswered,
including the factors behind the virus crossing the species barrier, the definitive origin of the virus,
the exact roles of distinct ORFs, the critical point mutation differences in virus transmission and
pathogenesis, the reason for the death of specific infected individuals while others remain
asymptomatic, and the reappearance of infection in specific cured individuals, among others. With
the availability of more complete genome sequences from different parts of the world, it is becoming
apparent that several virus mutants are circulating and need close monitoring. There is a need to
identify the role of the ADE mechanism in SARS-CoV-2, as well to plan for better immunomodulatory
therapies for the effective treatment and control of COVID-19 infections.
The functions of non-structural proteins in a typical coronavirus and SARS-CoV-2 (predicted by bioinformatics
and P.K. involved in data collection and analysis; U.G., V.K.O.R. and M.E.E.Z. performed epidemiological data
analysis and drafting of immunopathology section; P.G., K.G. and M.P.S. collected material on clinical diagnosis
and clinical profile; M.I.Y., R.T., M.P. and S.K.P. involved in data collection and updating material on vaccine,
therapy and prevention control; K.D., R.S., A.J.R.M. and R.K.S. involved in revising, updating, checking, and
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Y.S.M. acknowledges the support of the Education Division, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New
Delhi, India, in the form of ICAR-National Fellowship.
Gorbalenya, A.E.; Baker, S.C.; Baric, R.S.; de Groot, R.J.; Drosten, C.; Gulyaeva, A.A.; Haagmans, B.L.;
Lauber, C.; Leontovich, A.M.; Neuman, B.W.; et al. Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus:
The species and its viruses—A statement of the Coronavirus Study Group. Nat. Microbiol. 2020, 55, 536–
Huang, C.; Wang, Y.; Li, X.; Ren, L.; Zhao, J.; Hu, Y.; Zhang, L.; Fan, G.; Xu, J.; Gu, X.; et al. Clinical features
of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet 2020, 395, P497–P506.
Cucinotta, D.; Vanelli, M.; WHO Declares COVID-19 a Pandemic. Acta Biomed. 2020, 91, 157–160.
World Health Organization (WHO). Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) Situation Report–93. Available
Wei, M.; Yuan, J.; Liu, Y.; Fu, T.; Yu, X.; Zhang, Z.J. Novel coronavirus infection in hospitalized infants
under 1 year of age in China. J. Am. Med. Assoc. 2020, 323, 1313–1314.
Chen, N.; Zhou, M.; Dong, X.; Qu, J.; Gong, F.; Han, Y.; Qiu, Y.; Wang, J.; Liu, Y.; Wei, Y.; et al.
Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan,
China: A descriptive study. Lancet 2020, 395, 507–513.
Wang, D.; Hu, B.; Hu, C.; Zhu, F.; Liu, X.; Zhang, J.; Wang, B.; Xiang, H.; Cheng, Z.; Xiong, Y.; et al. Clinical
characteristics of 138 hospitalized patients with 2019 novel coronavirus-infected pneumonia in Wuhan,
China. J. Am. Med. Assoc. 2020, 323, 1061–1069.
Cai, H. Sex difference and smoking predisposition in patients with COVID-19. Lancet Respir. Med. 2020, 8,
Yu, W.-B.; Tang, G.-D.; Zhang, L.; Corlett, R. Decoding the evolution and transmissions of the novel
pneumonia coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) using the whole genomic data. Zool Res. 2020, 41, 247–257.
Li, Q.; Guan, X.; Wu, P.; Wang, X.; Zhou, L.; Tong, Y.; Ren, R.; Leung, K.S.M.; Lau, E.H.Y.; Wong, J.Y.; et al.
Early transmission dynamics in Wuhan, China, of novel coronavirus-infected pneumonia. N. Engl. J. Med.
Guo, Y.R.; Cao, Q.D.; Hong, Z.S.; Tan, Y.Y.; Chen, S.D.; Jin, H.J.; Tan, K.S.; Wang, D.Y.; Yan, Y. The origin,
transmission and clinical therapies on coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak—An update on the
status. Mil. Med. Res. 2020, 7, 11.
Hodgson, J. The pandemic pipeline. Nat. Biotechnol. 2020, 38, 523–532
Rothe, C.; Schunk, M.; Sothmann, P.; Bretzel, G.; Froeschl, G.; Wallrauch, C.; Zimmer, T.; Thiel, V.; Janke,
C.; Guggemos, W.; et al. Transmission of 2019-nCoV infection from an asymptomatic contact in Germany.
N. Engl. J. Med. 2020, 382, 970–971.
Cui, J.; Li, F.; Shi, Z.L. Origin and evolution of pathogenic coronaviruses. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2019, 17, 181–
Müller, M.A.; Corman, V.M.; Jores, J.; Meyer, B.; Younan, M.; Liljander, A.; Bosch, B.J.; Lattwein, E.; Hilali,
M.; Musa, B.E.; et al. MERS coronavirus neutralizing antibodies in camels, Eastern Africa, 1983–1997. Emerg.
Infect. Dis. 2014, 20, 2093–2095.
Ellwanger, J.H.; Chies, J.A.B.; Wind: A neglected factor in the spread of infectious diseases. Lancet Planet.
Health 2018, 2, e475.
Lam, T.T.-Y.; Shum, M.H.-H.; Zhu, H.-C.; Tong, Y.-G.; Ni, X.-B.; Liao, Y.-S.; Wei, W.; Cheung, W.Y.-M.; Li,
W.-J.; Li, L.-F; et al. Identifying SARS-CoV-2 related coronaviruses in Malayan pangolins. Nature 2020,
Fung, T.S.; Liu, D.X. Human coronavirus: Host-pathogen interaction. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 2019, 73, 529–
Corman, V.M.; Albarrak, A.M.; Omrani, A.S.; Albarrak, M.M.; Farah, M.E.; Almasri, M.; Muth, D.; Sieberg,
A.; Meyer, B.; Assiri, A.M.; et al. Viral shedding and antibody response in 37 patients with Middle East
respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection. Clin. Infect. Dis. 2016, 62, 477–483.
Su, S.; Wong, G.; Shi, W.; Liu, J.; Lai, A.C.; Zhou, J.; Liu, W.; Bi, Y.; Gao, G.F. Epidemiology, genetic
recombination, and pathogenesis of coronaviruses. Trends Microbiol. 2016, 24, 490–502.
Zhou, P.; Yang, X.L.; Wang, X.G.; Hu, B.; Zhang, L.; Zhang, W.; Si, H.R.; Zhu, Y.; Li, B.; Huang, C.L.; et al.
A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin. Nature 2020, 579, 270–
Yang, J.; Zheng, Y.; Gou, X.; Pu, K.; Chen, Z.; Guo, Q.; Ji, R.; Wang, H.; Wang, Y.; Zhou, Y. Prevalence of
Int. J. Infect. Dis. 2020, 94, 91–95.
Chan, J.F.; Kok, K.H.; Zhu, Z.; Chu, H.; To, K.K.; Yuan, S.; Yuen, K.Y. Genomic characterization of the 2019
novel human-pathogenic coronavirus isolated from a patient with atypical pneumonia after visiting
Wuhan. Emerg. Microbes Infect. 2020, 9, 221–236.
de Groot, R.J.; Baker, S.; Baric, R.; Enjuanes, L.; Gorbalenya, A.; Holmes, K.; Perlman, S.; Poon, L.; Rottier,
P.; Talbot, P. Family coronaviridae. In Virus Taxonomy: Ninth Report of the International Committee on
Taxonomy of Viruses; Academic Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2012; pp. 806–828.
Zhu, N.; Zhang, D.; Wang, W.; Li, X.; Yang, B.; Song, J.; Zhao, X.; Huang, B.; Shi, W.; Lu, R.; et al. A novel
coronavirus from patients with pneumonia in China, 2019. N. Engl. J. Med. 2020, 382, 727–733.
Wu, A.; Peng, Y.; Huang, B.; Ding, X.; Wang, X.; Niu, P.; Meng, J.; Zhu, Z.; Zhang, Z.; Wang, J.; et al. Genome
composition and divergence of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) originating in China. Cell Host Microbe
Fehr, A.R.; Perlman, S. Coronaviruses: An overview of their replication and pathogenesis. Methods Mol.
Chen, Y.; Liu, Q.; Guo, D. Emerging coronaviruses: Genome structure, replication, and pathogenesis. J.
Med. Virol. 2020, 92, 418–423.
Malik, Y.S.; Sircar, S.; Bhat, S.; Sharun, K.; Dhama, K.; Dadar, M.; Tiwari, R.; Chaicumpa, W. Emerging
novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV)-Current scenario, evolutionary perspective based on genome analysis and
recent developments. Vet. Q. 2020, 40, 11–2.
Lu, G.; Wang, Q.; Gao, G.F. Bat-to-human: Spike features determining ‘host jump’ of coronaviruses SARSCoV, MERS-CoV, and beyond. Trends Microbiol. 2015, 23, 468–478.
Lu, R.; Zhao, X.; Li, J.; Niu, P.; Yang, B.; Wu, H.; Wang, W.; Song, H.; Huang, B.; Zhu, N.; et al. Genomic
characterisation and epidemiology of 2019 novel coronavirus: Implications for virus origins and receptor
binding. Lancet 2020, 395, 565–574.
He, Y.; Zhou, Y.; Liu, S.; Kou, Z.; Li, W.; Farzan, M.; Jiang, S. Receptor-binding domain of SARS-CoV spike
protein induces highly potent neutralizing antibodies: Implication for developing subunit vaccine. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 2004, 324, 773–781.
Le Coupanec, A.; Desforges, M.; Meessen-Pinard, M.; Dube, M.; Day, R.; Seidah, N.G.; Talbot, P.J. Cleavage
of a neuroinvasive human respiratory virus spike glycoprotein by proprotein convertases modulates
neurovirulence and virus spread within the central nervous system. PLoS Pathog. 2015, 11, e1005261.
Kirchdoerfer, R.N.; Cottrell, C.A.; Wang, N.; Pallesen, J.; Yassine, H.M.; Turner, H.L.; Corbett, K.S.; Graham,
B.S.; McLellan, J.S.; Ward, A.B. Pre-fusion structure of a human coronavirus spike protein. Nature 2016, 531,
Walls, A.C.; Tortorici, M.A.; Snijder, J.; Xiong, X.; Bosch, B.J.; Rey, F.A.; Veesler, D. Tectonic conformational
changes of a coronavirus spike glycoprotein promote membrane fusion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2017,
39. Bassi, D.E.; Zhang, J.; Renner, C.; Klein-Szanto, A.J. Targeting proprotein convertases in furin-rich lung
cancer cells results in decreased in vitro and in vivo growth. Mol. Carcinog. 2017, 56, 1182–1188.
40. Yang, Z.; Lasker, K.; Schneidman-Duhovny, D.; Webb, B.; Huang, C.C.; Pettersen, E.F.; Goddard, T.D.;
Meng, E.C.; Sali, A.; Ferrin, T.E. UCSF Chimera, MODELLER, and IMP: An integrated modeling system. J.
Struct. Biol. 2012, 179, 269–278.
41. Li, F. Receptor recognition and cross-species infections of SARS coronavirus. Antiviral Res. 2013, 100, 246–
42. Li, F.; Receptor recognition mechanisms of coronaviruses: A decade of structural studies. J. Virol. 2015, 89,
43. Hoffmann, M.; Kleine-Weber, H.; Schroeder, S.; Krüger, N.; Herrler, T.; Erichsen, S.; Schiergens, T.S.;
Herrler, G.; Wu, N.-H.; Nitsche, A.; et al. SARS-CoV-2 cell entry depends on ace2 and tmprss2 and is
blocked by a clinically proven protease inhibitor. Cell 2020, 181, 271–280.
44. Wong, S.K.; Li, W.; Moore, M.J.; Choe, H.; Farzan, M. A 193-amino acid fragment of the SARS coronavirus
S protein efficiently binds angiotensin-converting enzyme 2. J. Biol. Chem. 2004, 279, 3197–3201.
45. Wong, A.H.; Tomlinson, A.C.; Zhou, D.; Satkunarajah, M.; Chen, K.; Sharon, C.; Desforges, M.; Talbot, P.J.;
Rini, J.M. Receptor-binding loops in alphacoronavirus adaptation and evolution. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 1–
46. van Doremalen, N.; Bushmaker, T.; Morris, D.H.; Holbrook, M.G.; Gamble, A.; Williamson, B.N.; Tamin,
A.; Harcourt, J.L.; Thornburg, N.J.; Gerber, S.I.; et al. Aerosol and surface stability of SARS-CoV-2 as
compared with SARS-CoV-1. N. Engl. J. Med. 2020, 382, 1564–1567.
47. Van Doremalen, N.; Bushmaker, T.; Munster, V. Stability of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus
(MERS-CoV) under different environmental conditions. Eurosurveillance 2013, 18, 20590.
48. Sizun, J.; Yu, M.; Talbot, P. Survival of human coronaviruses 229E and OC43 in suspension and after drying
onsurfaces: A possible source ofhospital-acquired infections. J. Hosp. Infect. 2000, 46, 55–60.
49. Warnes, S.L.; Little, Z.R.; Keevil, C.W. Human coronavirus 229E remains infectious on common touch
surface materials. mBio 2015, 6, e01697–e01715.
50. Rabenau, H.; Cinatl, J.; Morgenstern, B.; Bauer, G.; Preiser, W.; Doerr, H. Stability and inactivation of SARS
coronavirus. Med. Microbiol. Immunol. 2005, 194, 1–6.
51. Kratzel, A.; Todt, D.; V’kovski, P.; Steiner, S.; Gultom, M.L.; Thao, T.T.N.; Ebert, N.; Holwerda, M.;
Steinmann, J.; Niemeyer, D.; et al. Efficient inactivation of SARS-CoV-2 by WHO-recommended hand rub
52. Kratzel, A.; Todt, D.; V’Kovski, P.; Steiner, S.; Gultom, M.; Thao, T.T.N.; Ebert, N.; Holwerda, M.;
Steinmann, J.; Niemeyer, D.; et al. Inactivation of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 by
WHO-Recommended hand rub formulations and alcohols. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 2020, 26, 1592-1595.
53. Letunic, I.; Bork, P. Interactive Tree of Life (iTOL) v4: Recent updates and new developments. Nucleic Acids
Res. 2019, 47, W256—W259.
54. Xiang, N.; Havers, F.; Chen, T.; Song, Y.; Tu, W.; Li, L.; Cao, Y.; Liu, B.; Zhou, L.; Meng, L.; et al. Use of
national pneumonia surveillance to describe influenza A(H7N9) virus epidemiology, China, 2004–2013.
Emerg. Infect. Dis. 2013, 19, 1784–1790.
55. Chen, H.; Guo, J.; Wang, C.; Luo, F.; Yu, X.; Zhang, W.; Li, J.; Zhao, D.; Xu, D.; Gong, Q.; et al. Clinical
characteristics and intrauterine vertical transmission potential of COVID-19 infection in nine pregnant
56. Yeo, C.; Kaushal, S.; Yeo, D.; Enteric involvement of coronaviruses: Is faecal-oral transmission of SARSCoV-2 possible? Lancet Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2020, 5, 335–337.
57. Bai, Y.; Yao, L.; Wei, T.; Tian, F.; Jin, D.-Y.; Chen, L.; Wang, M. Presumed asymptomatic carrier transmission
of COVID-19. J. Am. Med. Assoc. 2020, 323, 1406–1407.
58. Hindson, J. COVID-19: Faecal–oral transmission? Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2020, 17, 259.
59. Xu, Y.; Li, X.; Zhu, B.; Liang, H.; Fang, C.; Gong, Y.; Guo, Q.; Sun, X.; Zhao, D.; Shen, J. Characteristics of
pediatric SARS-CoV-2 infection and potential evidence for persistent fecal viral shedding. Nat. Med. 2020,
Zhang, W.; Du, R.H.; Li, B.; Zheng, X.S.; Yang, X.L.; Hu, B.; Wang, Y.Y.; Xiao, G.F.; Yan, B.; Shi, Z.L.; et al.
Molecular and serological investigation of 2019-nCoV infected patients: Implication of multiple shedding
routes. Emerg. Microbes Infect. 2020, 9, 386–389.
World Health Organization (WHO). Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). Situation Report–30. Available
Liu, Y.; Gayle, A.A.; Wilder-Smith, A.; Rocklöv, J. The reproductive number of COVID-19 is higher
compared to SARS coronavirus. J. Travel Med. 2020, 27, taaa021
Conti, P.; Younes, A. Coronavirus COV-19/SARS-CoV-2 Affects Women Less Than Men: Clinical Response
Ronconi, G.; Teté, G.; Kritas, S.K.; Gallenga, C.E.; Caraffa, A.; Ross, R.; Conti, P. SARS-CoV-2, Which
World Health Organization (WHO). Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Technical Guidance. Available
World Health Organization (WHO). Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Situation Report–2. Available
World Health Organization (WHO). Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) Situation Report–81. Available
Rothan, H.A.; Byrareddy, S.N. The epidemiology and pathogenesis of coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
Hu, Z.; Song, C.; Xu, C.; Jin, G.; Chen, Y.; Xu, X.; Ma, H.; Chen, W.; Lin, Y.; Zheng, Y. Clinical characteristics
of 24 asymptomatic infections with COVID-19 screened among close contacts in Nanjing, China. Sci. China
Life Sci. 2020, 63, 706–711.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Pregnancy and
He, F.; Deng, Y.; Li, W. Coronavirus disease 2019: What we know? J. Med. Virol. 2020, 92, 719–725.
Xu, Z.; Shi, L.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, J.; Huang, L.; Zhang, C.; Liu, S.; Zhao, P.; Liu, H.; Zhu, L.; et al. Pathological
findings of COVID-19 associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome. Lancet Respir. Med. 2020, 8, 420–
Chan, K.H.; Peiris, J.S.; Lam, S.Y.; Poon, L.L.; Yuen, K.Y.; Seto, W.H. The Effects of temperature and relative
humidity on the viability of the SARS coronavirus. Adv. Virol. 2011, 2011, 734690.
Chan, J.F.; Yuan, S.; Kok, K.H.; To, K.K.; Chu, H.; Yang, J.; Xing, F.; Liu, J.; Yip, C.C.; Poon, R.W.; et al. A
familial cluster of pneumonia associated with the 2019 novel coronavirus indicating person-to-person
transmission: A study of a family cluster. Lancet 2020, 395, 514–523.
Yao, X.H.; Li, T.Y.; He, Z.C.; Ping, Y.F.; Liu, H.W.; Yu, S.C.; Mou, H.M.; Wang, L.H.; Zhang, H.R.; Fu, W.J.;
et al. A pathological report of three COVID-19 cases by minimally invasive autopsies. J. Pathol. 2020, 49,
Xu, Y.H.; Dong, J.H.; An, W.M.; Lv, X.Y.; Yin, X.P.; Zhang, J.Z.; Dong, L.; Ma, X.; Zhang, H.J.; Gao, B.L.
Clinical and computed tomographic imaging features of novel coronavirus pneumonia caused by SARSCoV-2. J. Infect. 2020, 80, 394–400.
Chen, L.; Liu, H.G.; Liu, W.; Liu, J.; Liu, K.; Shang, J.; Deng, Y.; Wei, S. Analysis of clinical features of 29
patients with 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia. Int. J. Tuberc. Lung. Dis. 2020, 43, 203–208.
Pan, Y.; Guan, H.; Zhou, S.; Wang, Y.; Li, Q.; Zhu, T.; Hu, Q.; Xia, L. Initial CT findings and temporal
changes in patients with the novel coronavirus pneumonia (2019-nCoV): A study of 63 patients in Wuhan,
China. Eur. Radiol. 2020, 30, 3306–3309.
Pan, F.; Ye, T.; Sun, P.; Gui, S.; Liang, B.; Li, L.; Zheng, D.; Wang, J.; Hesketh, R.L.; Yang, L.; et al. Time
course of lung changes on chest CT during recovery from 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pneumonia.
Lei, J.; Li, J.; Li, X.; Qi, X. CT imaging of the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) pneumonia. Radiology
Mehta, P.; McAuley, D.F.; Brown, M.; Sanchez, E.; Tattersall, R.S.; Manson, J.J. COVID-19: Consider
cytokine storm syndromes and immunosuppression. Lancet 2020, 395, 1033–1034.
Giwa, A.; Desai, A. Novel coronavirus COVID-19: An overview for emergency clinicians. Emerg. Med. Pract.
Qin, C.; Zhou, L.; Hu, Z.; Zhang, S.; Yang, S.; Tao, Y. Dysregulation of immune response in patients with
COVID-19 in Wuhan, China. Clin. Infect. Dis. 2020, 53, 1689–1699.
Conti, P.; Ronconi, G.; Caraffa, A.; Gallenga, C.E.; Ross, R.; Frydas, I.; Kritas, S.K. Induction of proinflammatory cytokines (IL-1 and IL-6) and lung inflammation by Coronavirus-19 (COVID-19 or SARSCoV-2): Anti-inflammatory strategies. J. Biol. Regul. Homeost. Agents 2020, 34, 1.
Ehmann, K.Z.; Drosten, C.; Wendtner, C.; Zange, M.; Vollmar, P.; Rosina Ehmann, D.; Zwirglmaier, K.;
Guggemos, M.; Seilmaier, M.; Niemeyer, D. Virological assessment of hospitalized patients with COVID2019. Nature 2020, 581, 465–469.
Peiris, J.; Lai, S.; Poon, L.; Guan, Y.; Yam, L.; Lim, W.; Nicholls, J.; Yee, W.; Yan, W.; Cheung, M. Coronavirus
as a possible cause of severe acute respiratory syndrome. Lancet 2003, 361, 1319–1325.
Zhao, J.; Yuan, Q.; Wang, H.; Liu, W.; Liao, X.; Su, Y.; Wang, X.; Yuan, J.; Li, T.; Li, J. Antibody responses to
Chen, G.; Wu, D.; Guo, W.; Cao, Y.; Huang, D.; Wang, H.; Wang, T.; Zhang, X.; Chen, H.; Yu, H. Clinical
and immunological features of severe and moderate coronavirus disease 2019. J. Clin. Invest. 2020, 130.
Glass, W.G.; Subbarao, K.; Murphy, B.; Murphy, P.M. Mechanisms of host defense following severe acute
respiratory syndrome-coronavirus (SARS-CoV) pulmonary infection of mice. J. Immunol. 2004, 173, 4030–
Helms, J.; Tacquard, C.; Severac, F.; Leonard-Lorant, I.; Ohana, M.; Delabranche, X.; Merdji, H.; Clere-Jehl,
R.; Schenck, M.; Gandet, F.F. High risk of thrombosis in patients with severe SARS-CoV-2 infection: A
multicenter prospective cohort study. Intensive Care Med. 2020, 46, 1–10.
Liang, W.; Guan, W.; Chen, R.; Wang, W.; Li, J.; Xu, K.; Li, C.; Ai, Q.; Lu, W.; Liang, H. Cancer patients in
SARS-CoV-2 infection: A nationwide analysis in china. The Lancet Oncology 2020, 21, 335–337.
Cameron, M.J.; Bermejo-Martin, J.F.; Danesh, A.; Muller, M.P.; Kelvin, D.J. Human immunopathogenesis
of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). Virus Res. 2008, 133, 13–19.
Prompetchara, E.; Ketloy, C.; Palaga, T. Immune responses in COVID-19 and potential vaccines: Lessons
learned from SARS and MERS epidemic. Asian Pac. J. Allergy Immunol. 2020, 38, 1–9.
Liu, J.; Li, S.; Liu, J.; Liang, B.; Wang, X.; Wang, H.; Li, W.; Tong, Q.; Yi, J.; Zhao, L., et al. Longitudinal
characteristics of lymphocyte responses and cytokine profiles in the peripheral blood of SARS-CoV-2
infected patients. EBioMedicine 2020, 55, 102763.
Tetro, J.A. Is COVID-19 receiving ADE from other coronaviruses? Microbes Infect. 2020, 22, 72–73.
Cao, X. COVID-19: Immunopathology and its implications for therapy. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2020, 22, 72–73.
Li, X.; Zai, J.; Zhao, Q.; Nie, Q.; Li, Y.; Foley, B.T.; Chaillon, A. Evolutionary history, potential intermediate
animal host, and cross-species analyses of SARS-CoV-2. J. Med. Virol. 2020, 92, 602–611.
Ji, W.; Wang, W.; Zhao, X.; Zai, J.; Li, X. Cross-species transmission of the newly identified coronavirus
2019-nCoV. J. Med. Virol. 2020, 92, 433–440.
Han, G.-Z. Pangolins harbor SARS-CoV-2-related coronaviruses. Trends Microbiol. 2020, 28, 515–517.
Shi, J.; Wen, Z.; Zhong, G.; Yang, H.; Wang, C.; Huang, B.; Liu, R.; He, X.; Shuai, L.; Sun, Z.; et al.
Susceptibility of ferrets, cats, dogs, and other domesticated animals to SARS–coronavirus 2. Science 2020,
American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA). SARS-CoV-2 in Animals, Including Pets. Available
Callaway, E. Labs rush to study coronavirus in transgenic animals—Some are in short supply. Nature 2020,
105. Wentworth, D.E.; Gillim-Ross, L.; Espina, N.; Bernard, K.A. Mice susceptible to SARS coronavirus. Emerg.
Infect. Dis. 2004, 10, 1293–1296.
106. Hogan, R.J.; Gao, G.; Rowe, T.; Bell, P.; Flieder, D.; Paragas, J.; Kobinger, G.P.; Wivel, N.A.; Crystal, R.G.;
Boyer, J.; et al. Resolution of primary severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated coronavirus infection
requires Stat1. J. Virol. 2004, 78, 11416–11421.
107. Roberts, A.; Vogel, L.; Guarner, J.; Hayes, N.; Murphy, B.; Zaki, S.; Subbarao, K. Severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus infection of golden Syrian hamsters. J. Virol. 2005, 79, 503–511.
108. Kim, Y.-I.; Kim, S.-G.; Kim, S.-M.; Kim, E.-H.; Park, S.-J.; Yu, K.-M.; Chang, J.-H.; Kim, E.J.; Lee, S.; Casel,
M.A.B.; et al. Infection and rapid transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in ferrets. Cell Host Microbe 2020, 27, C704–
109. To, K.K.; Tsang, O.T.; Chik-Yan Yip, C.; Chan, K.H.; Wu, T.C.; Chan, J.M.C.; Leung, W.S.; Chik, T.S.; Choi,
C.Y.; Kandamby, D.H.; et al. Consistent detection of 2019 novel coronavirus in saliva. Clin. Infect. Dis. 2020,
110. Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostic (FIND). COVID-19 Diagnostics Resource Centre. Available
on 2 April 2020).
113. Li, Z.; Yi, Y.; Luo, X.; Xiong, N.; Liu, Y.; Li, S.; Sun, R.; Wang, Y.; Hu, B.; Chen, W.; et al. Development and
clinical application of a rapid IGM-IGG combined antibody test for SARS-CoV-2 infection diagnosis. J. Med.
114. Zheng, J. SARS-CoV-2: An emerging coronavirus that causes a global threat. Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2020, 16, 1678–
115. Ai, J.W.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, H.C.; Xu, T.; Zhang, W.H. Era of molecular diagnosis for pathogen identification
of unexplained pneumonia, lessons to be learned. Emerg. Microbes Infect. 2020, 9, 597–600.
116. Rao, A.S.S.; Vazquez, J.A. Identification of COVID-19 can be quicker through artificial intelligence
framework using a mobile phone-based survey in the populations when cities/towns are under quarantine.
117. Allam, Z.; Jones, D.S. On the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak and the smart city network: Universal data
sharing standards coupled with artificial intelligence (AI) to benefit urban health monitoring and
management. Healthcare 2020, 8, 46.
118. Li, L.; Qin, L.; Xu, Z.; Yin, Y.; Wang, X.; Kong, B.; Bai, J.; Lu, Y.; Fang, Z.; Song, Q. Artificial intelligence
distinguishes COVID-19 from community acquired pneumonia on chest CT. Radiology 2020,
119. Santosh, K. AI-driven tools for coronavirus outbreak: Need of active learning and cross-population
train/test models on multitudinal/multimodal data. J. Med. Syst. 2020, 44, 15.
120. Pang, J.; Wang, M.X.; Ang, I.Y.H.; Tan, S.H.X.; Lewis, R.F.; Chen, J.I.; Gutierrez, R.A.; Gwee, S.X.W.; Chua,
P.E.Y.; Yang, Q.; et al. Potential rapid diagnostics, vaccine and therapeutics for 2019 novel coronavirus
121. Le, T.T.; Andreadakis, Z.; Kumar, A.; Roman, R.G.; Tollefsen, S.; Saville, M.; Mayhew, S. The COVID -19
vaccine development landscape. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 2020, 19, 305–306.
(accessed on 10 April 2020).
124. Guo, D. Old weapon for new enemy: Drug repurposing for treatment of newly emerging viral diseases.
125. Mifsud, E.J.; Hayden, F.G.; Hurt, A.C. Antivirals targeting the polymerase complex of influenza viruses.
Antiviral Res. 2019, 169, 104545.
126. Wang, C.; Li, W.; Drabek, D.; Okba, N.M.A.; van Haperen, R.; Osterhaus, A.D.M.E.; van Kuppeveld, F.J.M.;
Haagmans, B.L.; Grosveld, F.; Bosch, B.-J. A human monoclonal antibody blocking SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 2251.
127. Sheahan, T.P.; Sims, A.C.; Leist, S.R.; Schafer, A.; Won, J.; Brown, A.J.; Montgomery, S.A.; Hogg, A.; Babusis,
D.; Clarke, M.O.; et al. Comparative therapeutic efficacy of remdesivir and combination lopinavir,
ritonavir, and interferon beta against MERS-CoV. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 222.
128. Cao, B.; Wang, Y.; Wen, D.; Liu, W.; Wang, J.; Fan, G.; Ruan, L.; Song, B.; Cai, Y.; Wei, M.; et al. A trial of
lopinavir–ritonavir in adults hospitalized with severe COVID-19. N. Engl. J. Med. 2020, 382, 1787–1799.
129. Gautret, P.; Lagier, J.C.; Parola, P.; Hoang, V.T.; Meddeb, L.; Mailhe, M.; Doudier, B.; Courjon, J.;
Giordanengo, V.; Vieira, V.E.; et al. Hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin as a treatment of COVID-19:
Results of an open-label non-randomized clinical trial. Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents 2020,
130. Chen, L.; Xiong, J.; Bao, L.; Shi, Y. Convalescent plasma as a potential therapy for COVID-19. Lancet Infect.
tocilizumab in the treatment of rheumatic diseases. Rheumatol. Ther. 2018, 5, 21–42.
132. Adhikari, S.P.; Meng, S.; Wu, Y.J.; Mao, Y.P.; Ye, R.X.; Wang, Q.Z.; Sun, C.; Sylvia, S.; Rozelle, S.; Raat, H.;
et al. Epidemiology, causes, clinical manifestation and diagnosis, prevention and control of coronavirus
work plan for prevention and control of pneumonia caused by novel coronavirus infection in the near
136. World Health Organization (WHO). Advice on the use of masks in the community, during home care and
in health care settings in the context of the novel coronavirus 2019-nCoV outbreak (Interim guidance).
WHO/2019-nCov/IPC_Masks/2020.3 (accessed on 8 April 2020).
137. Radin, J.M.; Wineinger. N.E.; Topol, E.J., Steinhubl, S.R. H. Fitbit-informed influenza forecasts. Lancet
138. Radin, J.M.; Wineinger, N.E.; Topol, E.J.; Steinhubl, S.R. Harnessing wearable device data to improve statelevel real-time surveillance of influenza-like illness in the USA: A population-based study. Lancet Digital
Health 2020, 2, 2, E85–E93.
139. Kampf, G.; Todt, D.; Pfaender, S.; Steinman, E. Persistence of coronaviruses on inanimate surfaces and their
inactivation with biocidal agents. J. Hosp. Infect. 2020, 114, 6.
140. Murdoch, D.R.; French, N.P. COVID-19: Another infectious disease emerging at the animal-human
interface. N. Z. Med. J. 2020, 133, 12–15.
141. Malik, Y.S.; Sircar, S.; Bhat, S.; Vinodhkumar, O.R.; Tiwari, R.; Sah, R.; Rabaan, A.A.; Rodriguez-Morales,
A.J.; Dhama, K. Emerging coronavirus disease (COVID-19), a pandemic public health emergency with
142. Dhama, K.; Patel, S.K.; Sharun, K.; Pathak, M.; Tiwari, R.; Yatoo, M.I.; Malik, Y.S.; Sah, R.; Rabaan, A.A.;
Panwar, P.K.; et al. SARS-CoV-2: Jumping the species barrier, lessons from SARS and MERS, its zoonotic
spillover, transmission to humans, preventive and control measures and recent developments to counter
context of COVID-19: A look into the ecology of this emerging disease. Adv. Animal Vet. Sci. 2020, 8, 1–3.
144. Dhama, K.; Verma, A.; Tiwari, R.; Chakraborty, S.; Vora, K.; Kapoor, Rajib, D.; Karthik, K.; Singh, R.; Munir,
M.; et al. A perspective on applications of geographical information system (GIS); an advanced tracking
tool for disease surveillance and monitoring in veterinary epidemiology. Adv. Animal Vet. Sci. 2013, 1, 14–
145. World Health Organization (WHO). Battle against Respiratory Viruses (BRaVe) initiative.
146. Singh, R.K.; Dhama, K.; Chakraborty, S.; Tiwari, R.; Natesan, S.; Khandia, R.; Munjal, A.; Vora, K.S.; Latheef,
S.K.; Karthik, K.; et al. Nipah virus: Epidemiology, pathology, immunobiology and advances in diagnosis,
147. Rodriguez-Morales, A.; Bonilla-Aldana, D.; Tiwari, R.; Sah, R.; Rabaan, A.; Dhama, K. COVID-19 an
emerging coronavirus infection: Current scenario and recent developments—An Overview. J. Pure Appl.
148. Rabaan, A.A.; Al-Ahmed, S.H.; Haque, S.; Sah, R.; Tiwari, R.; Malik, Y.S.; Dhama, K.; Yatoo, M.I.; BonillaAldana, D.K.; Rodriguez-Morales, A.J. SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV, and MERS-CoV: A comparative overview.
Infez. Med. 2020, 28, 174–184.
149. Rabaan, A.A.; Al-Ahmed, S.H.; Sah, R.; Tiwari, R.; Yatoo, M.I.; Patel, S.K.; Pathak, M.; Malik, Y.S.; Dhama,
K.; Singh, K.P.; et al. SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 and advances in developing potential therapeutics and
150. Munjal, A.; Khandia, R.; Dhama, K.; Sachan, S.; Karthik, K.; Tiwari, R.; Malik, Y.S.; Kumar, D.; Singh, R.K.;
Iqbal, H.M.N.; et al. Advances in developing therapies to combat Zika Virus: Current knowledge and future
perspectives. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 1469.
151. Dhama, K.; Sharun, K.; Tiwari, R.; Dadar, M.; Malik, Y.S.; Singh, K.P.; Chaicumpa, W. COVID-19, an
emerging coronavirus infection: Advances and prospects in designing and developing vaccines,
152. Dhama, K.; Karthik, K.; Khandia, R.; Chakraborty, S.; Munjal, A.; Latheef, S.K.; Kumar, D.; Ramakrishnan,
M.A.; Malik, Y.S.; Singh, R.; et al. Advances in designing and developing vaccines, drugs, and therapies to
counter Ebola virus. Front. Immunol. 2018, 9, 1803.
153. Chatterjee, P.; Nagi, N.; Agarwal, A.; Das, B.; Banerjee, S.; Sarkar, S.; Gupta, N.; Gangakhedkar, R.R. The
154. Conti, P.; Gallenga, C.E.; Tetè, G.; Caraffa, A.; Ronconi, G.; Younes, A.; Toniato, E.; Ross, R.; Kritas, S.K.;
How to reduce the likelihood of coronavirus-19 (CoV-19 or SARS-CoV-2) infection and lung inflammation
155. El Zowalaty, M.E.; Järhult, J.D. From SARS to COVID-19: A previously unknown SARS- related
coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) of pandemic potential infecting humans—Call for a one health approach. One
