Practical Considerations for Solid Organ
Transplantation During the COVID-19 Global
Outbreak: The Experience from Singapore
Shimin Jasmine Chung, MBBS, BSc, MRCP (UK),1,2 Ek Khoon Tan, MBBS, MMed, MPH, FRCSEd,2,3
Terence Kee, MBBS, MRCP (UK), FAMS, FRCP, FASN,2,4 Thinesh Lee Krishnamoorthy, MBChB, BSc, MRCP (UK),2,5
Ghee Chee Phua, MBBS, MMed, MRCP(UK), FAMS, FCCP, EDIC,2,6 Duu Wen Sewa, MBBS, MRCP (UK),2,6
Boon-Hean Ong, MBBS, MRCSEd, FRCSEd (CTh), FAMS,2,7 Teing Ee Tan, MBBS, FRCSEd,2,7
Cumaraswamy Sivathasan, MBBS, FRCS (Eng/Edin), FAMS,2,7 Huei Li Valerie Gan, MBBS, MRCS, MMed, FAMS,2,8
Brian Kim Poh Goh, MBBS, MMed, MSc, FRCSEd, FAMS,2,3
Prema Raj Jeyaraj, MBBS, Mmed, FRCS (Glasg), FRCS (Ed), FAMS,2,3 and Ban Hock Tan, MBBS, FRCP (UK)1,2
Abstract. The current coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has not only caused global social disruptions but
has also put tremendous strain on healthcare systems worldwide. With all attention and significant effort diverted to containing and managing the COVID-19 outbreak (and understandably so), essential medical services such as transplant services
are likely to be affected. Closure of transplant programs in an outbreak caused by a highly transmissible novel pathogen
die before the program reopens. By adopting a tiered approach based on outbreak disease alert levels, and having hospital
guidelines based on the best available evidence, life-saving transplants can still be safely performed. We performed a lung
transplant and a liver transplant successfully during the COVID-19 era. We present our guidelines and experience on managing the transplant service as well as the selection and management of donors and recipients. We also discuss clinical
dilemmas in the management COVID-19 in the posttransplant recipient.
ecause of the emergence of a novel coronavirus (now
called Severe Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome
[SARS]-CoV-2, causing the disease coronavirus disease 2019
[COVID-19]) in Wuhan, China, in December 2019, there has
been an exponential increase in the global number of confirmed cases. There are now >2 million cases in >200 countries.
The ongoing COVID-19 outbreak has outstripped the 2003
SARS in scale and worldwide extent, leading the World Health
Organization to officially declare it a pandemic on March
11, 2020.1 The evolution of COVID-19 and the containment
efforts to combat it are reminiscent of SARS. The potential for
healthcare systems to be crippled by this pandemic is real and
looming. Essential medical services may be affected, as hospitals commandeer resources to care for COVID-19 patients
and suspects.2 During SARS, cities experiencing community
transmission, such as Singapore and Toronto, closed their
transplant programs temporarily.3,4 Although SARS came
under control after a few months, allowing transplantation to
resume, the current COVID-19 outbreak may be long-drawn.
Organ transplantation is an essential medical service and cannot be put on hold indefinitely or for a prolonged period of
time without compromising patients on the waiting list. Thus,
Department of Infectious Diseases, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore.
SingHealth Duke-NUS Transplant Centre, Singapore.
Department of Hepatopancreatobiliary and Transplant Surgery, Singapore
General Hospital, Singapore.
Department of Gasteroentrology and Hepatology, Singapore General Hospital,
Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Singapore General
Hospital, Singapore.
Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, National Heart Centre, Singapore.
Department of Renal Medicine Singapore General Hospital, Singapore.
Department of Urology, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore.
S.J.C., E.K.T., T.K., P.R.J., and B.H.T. participated in the writing of the paper.
S.J.C., E.K.T., T.L.K., G.C.P., D.W.S., B.-H.O., T.E.T., C.S., T.K., H.L.V.G.,
B.K.P.G., P.R.J., and B.H.T. drafted the institutional guidelines.
Correspondence: Shimin Jasmine Chung, MBBS, BSc, MRCP (UK), Department
of Infectious Diseases, SGH, The Academia Level 3, 20 College Rd, Singapore
Transplantation DIRECT
(CCBY-NC-ND), where it is permissible to download and share the work provided
Transplantation DIRECT
this outbreak, we the transplant community have to evaluate
how best to continue providing transplant care during these
trying times.
Here, in Singapore, evidence of local transmission occurred
shortly after the first imported cases were diagnosed.5 Having
survived the tragedy of SARS, our hospital had swung into
crisis mode early, freeing the negative-pressure isolation ward
of its usual patients (eg, those with tuberculosis, carbapenemresistant Enterobacteriaceae) and reducing the number of
elective surgeries to create bed capacity. Strict infection prevention protocols were implemented, and compliance audits
were started. The heightened level of operations and the desire
to maintain transplant as an essential service prompted us to
develop internal guidelines on the selection and management
of donors and recipients for transplantation in the setting of
COVID-19. Shortly thereafter, a brain-dead donor was identified. We implemented these guidelines and proceeded to perform a deceased-donor lung and a liver transplant. The aim of
to continue provision of organ transplantation services during
this pandemic. Specifically, we want to highlight the need for a
tiered approach as the pandemic evolves.
EVOLVING EPIDEMIOLOGY OF COVID-19 AND ITS
IMPACT ON DECISION FOR TRANSPLANT
The first reported cluster of SARS-CoV-2 infected individuals in December 2019 was reportedly linked to a large
seafood and live animal market in Wuhan, Hubei Province,
China, suggesting a zoonotic origin for this novel pathogen. Despite early closure of the market with attempts
made to isolate suspects and closely monitor contacts, by
mid-January 2020, COVID-19 had spread widely across
China and exported cases were reported mainly in the Asia
Pacific region, suggesting that human-to-human transmission (through droplets or direct contact) had become
more common.6-9 International travel further facilitated
the global spread of COVID-19. As we now know, SARSCoV-2 is highly transmissible with a reported reproduction
number (R0) between 1.4 and 5.5.10 Asymptomatic and
presymptomatic transmission before isolation, quarantine, social distancing, and community containment efforts
likely contributed to the surge of cases globally.6,8,11-13
Based on current understanding of influenza pandemics,14
we had anticipated that the COVID-19 outbreak would reach
Singapore (and other parts of the world). Once human-tohuman transmission was established, infections would be
imported from affected areas resulting in the emergence of
local clusters, and subsequently widespread community transmission with unlinked cases, particularly among densely populated cities like Singapore.5,6,13
As the situation was rapidly evolving, we envisioned a stratified decision-making process to allow our transplant service
to respond to different phases of the pandemic. We developed
exercised, restricting transplantation to those who require it
urgently and cannot wait. Living donor transplantation activity, compared to deceased organ donation, will be reduced due
to the need to protect the interests of the living donor.
In general, urgent transplants refer to patients with the following conditions: (1) liver failure with a high 28-d mortality;
(2) heart failure patients who are on extracorporeal circulatory support, or mechanical circulatory support (MCS) with
evidence of device-related complications or those who require
continuous high-dose inotropic support; or (3) patients with
end-stage lung disease who cannot sustain long on the waitlist. The urgency to perform liver transplantation for patients
with hepatocellular carcinomas depends on their transplant
oncologic profile and whether bridging therapy is an option.
MCS and (2) those with end-stage renal failure awaiting kidney transplantation but have no urgent issues with dialysis
access.15 Apart from urgency of transplant, an individualized
risk assessment of the recipient based on the complexity of the
transplant procedure, extent of medical comorbidities, and
immunologic risk is also required. A medically and surgically
complex candidate may require extraordinary resources such
as an extended intensive care unit (ICU) stay, large amounts
of blood products, or subspecialty support; these may not be
promptly available when hospital resources and manpower
are diverted away. The infective nature of SARS-CoV-2 and
the implications on immunosuppression also imply that performing transplants with a higher immunological risk of
rejection such as ABO-incompatible transplant or transplants
for highly sensitized recipients may come at an increased risk.
With that in mind, we developed a decision-making grid to
that organ, against the principle of ideal patient selection for
a procedure, by recognizing the fact that a successful patient
outcome is intimately dependent on the resources that are
COVID-19 SITUATION IN SINGAPORE AND POLICY
STATEMENTS FROM THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH
Singapore’s first patient with COVID-19 was an imported
case that was diagnosed at our hospital. Local transmission
occurred within 2 wk and several local chains of transmission
were later identified.5 Through media reports, this sequence of
events has been played out many times in different countries.
In certain countries, even the earliest cases have not had travel
links.2,6 The ability to identify the local chains of transmission is attributed to the Singapore government establishing a
Ministerial taskforce that, under the auspices of the Infectious
Diseases Act, performed extensive contact tracing of infected
and exposed individuals.
On February 19, 2020, the local Ministry of Health (MOH)
issued a statement allowing living donor transplants to proceed, while temporarily banning all nonurgent deceased donor
transplants.15 As the epidemiologic curve of incident COVID19 cases in Singapore flattened toward the end of February
2020, MOH allowed nonurgent deceased donor transplants
as well, provided the earlier criteria were met (communication with MOH, Singapore on March 3, 2020). By then, our
workgroup had developed guidelines on how we would proceed with transplantation safely. The thought processes and
measures adopted are described in the subsequent sections.
Chung et al
Impact of disease outbreak alerts on transplantation programs
DORSCON alert45
Extent of COVID-19
Transmission predominantly within
Hubei Province, China
Rare cases exported outside of China
Increased transmission to multiple
provinces and municipalities in China
Increasing number of exported cases
outside of China
Imported case to Singapore; no local
transmission. No case fatality
Widespread transmission within China
Significant number of exported cases
outside of China, in a few WHO
regions. Reports of community
transmission outside of China
Local transmission WITHIN Singapore.
Severe cases of COVID-19 reported
Red (very high)
Widespread global transmission
Ongoing community transmission in
Risk of increased number of severe
Deceased donor
transplant program
Living donor
transplant program
Nil restrictions
Nil restrictions
Organ donors with positive travel history to affected To defer transplant for 14–28 d if organ donors
region may be rejected upon advice from TxID
had positive contact history or travel history to
affected areas
Although restrictions not imposed, to proceed with Nil restrictions. Thorough screening of donor
transplant with caution
and recipients through clinical history taking
Active screeningc and exclusion of donors and
recipients at risk of COVID-19 (based on history Active screeningc of donors and recipients who are
at risk of COVID-19 (based on history taking).
To defer transplant for 14–28 d if screen
Some restrictions placed on transplant program.
Restrictions may be imposed, to proceed with
To proceed with extra caution.d
extra caution.d
donor program transplant load expected to
Medically nonurgent transplants may be put on hold
dip. Exceptions may be considered for urgent
Precautions under DORSCON yellow apply. In addiliver transplants
tion, diagnostic testing to exclude COVID-19 is
mandated for both donor and recipient
Transplant surgeries are likely affected due to
diversion of resources to combat COVID-19
Suspension of nonurgent transplant likely
Medically urgent transplants to be considered on
a case by case basis in consult with TxID. This
is also dependent on available resources and
restrictions imposed based on situation
Precautions under DORSCON orange apply
Precautions under DORSCON yellow apply. In addition, diagnostic testing to exclude COVID-19 is
for both donor and recipient
Transplant surgeries are likely affected due to
diversion of resources to combat COVID-19
Suspension of nonurgent transplant likely
Medically urgent transplants to be considered on
a case by case basis in consult with TxID. This
is also dependent on available resources and
restrictions imposed based on situation
Precautions under DORSCON organ apply
DORSCON alert was raised to yellow on January 21, 2020.
DORSCON alert was raised to orange on February 7, 2020.
Donors would have to be screened for respiratory symptoms and travel history to affected areas or CONTACT with COVID-19 cases or suspects through history taking.
Decision to proceed with transplant is based on medical indication, and availability of manpower and resources. Medically urgent cases are given priority. Enhanced infection control precautions are
put in place; restrictions are placed on the number of visitors, and healthcare workers attending to the transplant recipient.
COVID-19, coronavirus disease 19; DORSCON, Disease Outbreak Response System Condition; TxID, Transplant Infectious Diseases; WHO, World Health Organization.
MOH issued another advisory on April 6, 2020 permitting
deceased donor organ transplants, and urgent living donor
liver transplant, with the proviso that infection control measures pertaining to the transplant procedure were intact, and
that there were available resources (eg, manpower, operating
theater facilities, surgical and intensive care beds, blood stock,
and adequacy of personal protective equipment [PPE]).16 At
the time of writing, Singapore is experiencing the second
wave of COVID-19 infections, which occurred first from residents returning from other countries, followed by an emergence of new local clusters and cases of unlinked community
PRINCIPAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR NEW ORGAN
TRANSPLANTATION DURING COVID-19
First and foremost, SARS-CoV-2 and the disease COVID19 are still being defined. What we do not know is the (1)
risk of transmission from a positive donor to a recipient,
(2) impact of a recipient becoming infected with COVID-19
and how that influences transplant outcomes, and (3) effective treatment (if any) for COVID-19. With that in mind, the
underlying principle (to allow safe transplants to continue)
would be based on any available evidence and adopting best
practices to exclude COVID-19 in the donor and the recipient,
while maintaining a smooth operational workflow that also
protects healthcare workers (HCWs).
MEASURES TO EXCLUDE COVID-19 IN DONORS
AND RECIPIENTS
Our COVID-19–specific guidelines for donor and recipient
time-sensitive nature of donation after brain death. The 14-d
lead-up period for living donor transplantation is based on
estimates that the median incubation period is approximately
5.1 d and that <1% will develop symptoms after 14 d of active
duration. The need for extensive testing has to be balanced
against the need to expedite the evaluation process to free
up ICU resources and allow a timely donation process that
case would automatically be excluded from donation. Donors
with any potential risk of exposure to known COVID-19
Transplantation DIRECT
surgical complexity, (b) extent of medical comorbidities, and (c) immunological risk. bIn general, medically urgent transplants are performed for
patients with (a) liver failure with a high 28-d mortality, (b) heart failure patients who are on MCS with evidence of device-related complications or
those who require continuous high-dose inotropic support, or (c) patients with end-stage lung disease who cannot sustain long on the waitlist.
patients who are well supported on MCS, and dialysis patients with no access issues. cDecision to proceed with transplantation is contingent on
the availability of manpower, operating theater facilities, medical equipment, surgical and intensive care beds, blood products, and adequacy of
PPE. MCS, mechanical circulatory support; PPE, personal protective equipment.
transmission routes (or fulfilling the case definition for a suspect case), such as recent travel history outside of Singapore,
or possible relationship to any of locally identified COVID-19
clusters, are excluded. Donors would also undergo objective
testing with SARS-CoV-2 polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
from a respiratory specimen. Sequential testing also improves
the sensitivity of the test, improving the confidence of ruling
out COVID-19. For deceased donors, an additional computed
tomography (CT) chest was performed even if SARS-CoV-2
that CT imaging findings of viral pneumonia from COVID-19
predated PCR tests from respiratory samples, allowing for an
earlier diagnosis.18-20
The criteria for potential transplant recipients are described
with COVID-19. For patients requiring an urgent transplant,
respiratory and febrile illnesses should be extensively evaluated to exclude COVID-19. For medically nonurgent transplants, a thorough history is taken from the recipients for the
presence of respiratory symptoms or fever, as well as contact and travel history. Last, a COVID-19 test is performed
as a final step to exclude asymptomatic COVID-19 infection
before proceeding to surgery. For potential living donor transplant donors and recipients, we recommended an interim
COVID-19 test at day 7 to proactively identify asymptomatic
infection in the candidate that would allow the termination of
the 14-d lead-up process to transplant.
TRANSPLANT CENTER POLICIES
Informed Consent for Transplant During COVID-19
Global Outbreak
An extra effort was made to counsel the recipients on
the risks of proceeding with transplant given the evolving
COVID-19 situation. We described existing steps and precautions adopted by the institution to exclude SARS-CoV-2 in
both donor and recipient. We emphasized that COVID-19
may not be fully excluded despite these measures and that the
natural history and management of COVID-19 infection in
transplant recipients were not known. Ultimately, these have
to be weighed against choosing to stay on the transplant waitlist and the risk of drop-out.
Infection Prevention Precautions
Hospital-wide infection prevention precautions were introduced in mid-January 2020. HCWs were also subject to
mandatory twice-daily reporting of body temperature and
a moratorium on future travel to affected countries. HCWs
returning from affected areas were placed on a 14-d stayhome notice. HCWs who were unwell were directed to the
staff clinic for prompt evaluation. All HCWs had to (at a
minimum) wear a surgical mask in all clinical settings. HCWs
in the isolation ward managing patients with or suspected
of having COVID-19 wore full PPE, including N95 masks,
face shield, long-sleeved gown, and gloves. Strict guidelines
were laid down for surgeons and anesthetists in the operating
room with regard to the use of appropriate PPE during procedures. Relevant to transplant, full PPE was used for aerosolgenerating procedures such as intubation and extubation or
surgery to the respiratory system. The N95 mask was worn
if the Cavitron Ultrasonic Surgical Aspirator was used. The
radiology unit screened all requests for investigations, creating a special workflow with segregated areas for patients with
worrying clinical and epidemiological features.21
The SingHealth Duke-NUS Transplant program implemented its own business contingency plans. Those currently
on or consulting for the inpatient transplant service were not
allowed to attend to COVID-19 cases or suspects. A roster
for an active and backup team(s) was drawn up where possible. For example, transplant coordinators were divided
into 2 teams. This allowed the continuation of services if any
team member became exposed to, or infected with COVID19, necessitating the need to quarantine the HCWs and team
members. As the donor team might need to travel to another
hospital for organ procurement, donor and recipient teams
were formed without overlap to further reduce the risk of
Chung et al
Donor and recipient selection criteria, and additional precautionary measures for transplant
Donor selection criteria
and instructions
Living donor transplant program
Deceased donor transplant program
In addition to fulfilling criteria for routine pretransplant workup, ALL of the
following apply
- Absence of respiratory symptoms for at least 14 d before planned transplant
Exclusion criteria
- No travel history outside of Singapore for at least 14 d before planned
- Respiratory specimen (eg, nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal specimen) test
negative for SARS-Co-V2 PCR (×2)a before proceeding with transplant
- Donors should not be COVID-19 suspects
The following precautions/advice are recommended:
- Minimize hosting contacts with travel outside of locale (eg, overseas family/
- Avoid congregational/large group meetings (where possible) before planned
- When participating in group activities, to wear a mask
- Practice social distancing
- Inform transplant coordinators if respiratory symptoms or febrile illness
Recipient selection criteria In addition to fulfilling criteria for routine pretransplant workup, ALL of the
and instructions
following apply
- Absence of respiratory symptoms for at least 14 d before planned transplant
- No travel history outside of Singapore for at least 14 d before planned
- Respiratory specimen (eg, nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal specimen) test
negative for SARS-CoV-2 PCR (×2)a before proceeding with transplant
- Should not be COVID-19 suspects
The following precautions/advice are recommended
- Minimize hosting contacts with travel outside of locale (eg, overseas family/
- Avoid congregational/large group meetings (where possible) before planned
- When participating in group activities, to wear a mask
Posttransplant inpatient
care for donor
Posttransplant inpatient
care for recipient
Instructions to appointed
full time caregiver(s)
- Those with ANY travel history outside of Singapore in the
last 28 d;
- COVID-19 suspects/cases at the time of evaluation
In addition to fulfilling criteria for routine pretransplant
workup, ALL of the following apply
(a) SARS-CoV-2 PCR (×3 specimens)b test negative
(b) CT Chest with no evidence for viral pneumoniac
Patients with negative SARS-CoV-2 PCR, and CT chest
findings not suggestive of viral pneumonia may be
considered as potential organ donors on a case by case
basis in consult with TxID
In addition to fulfilling criteria for routine pretransplant
For patients requiring a medically urgent transplant, ALL of
the following apply
- Should not be COVID-19 suspects
- Should be worked up for any respiratory symptoms/
fever, and COVID-19 ruled out before proceeding with
- In the absences of respiratory symptoms, respiratory
specimen (eg, nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal specimen) must still test negative for SARS-CoV-2 PCR (×1)
before transplant
For medically nonurgent transplant, ALL of the following
- Absence of respiratory symptoms for at least 14 d before
planned transplant
- No travel history outside of Singapore for at least 14 d
before planned transplant
- Respiratory specimen (eg, nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal specimen) test negative for SARS-CoV-2 PCR (×1)
just before proceeding with transplant
- Should not be COVID-19 suspects
- Practice social distancing
- Inform transplant coordinators if respiratory symptoms or febrile illness
Routine postsurgical care
Standard precautionsd
Recipient to be nursed strictly in a single room with droplet and standard precautions. Additional contact precautions for those who are
colonized with multidrug resistant organisms
If febrile illness develops, to work up as appropriatee
Have a dedicated full time caregiver
During the pretransplant period, the potential carer should, in the pretransplant period, adopt lifestyle restrictions that apply to the recipient.
It is advisable that during the observation period for the recipient (as described above), the appointed full-time caregiver(s) remain free
of respiratory symptoms. If they are unwell at any time before or after the transplant, they should inform the transplant coordinator, seek
medical help/advice, practice social distancing and appoint an alternative caregiver for the potential recipient while they recuperate
Transplantation DIRECT
Donor and recipient selection criteria, and additional precautionary measures for transplant
Living donor transplant program
Instructions to household
Deceased donor transplant program
Advice to caregivers:
- Minimize hosting contacts with travel outside of locale (eg, overseas family/friends)
- Avoid congregational/large group meetings (where possible) before planned transplant
- When participating in group activities, to wear a mask
- Practice social distancing
- Inform transplant coordinators if respiratory symptoms or febrile illness develops
- Observe good personal hygiene
- Be up to date with their yearly influenza vaccination
Advice to household members
- Observe good personal hygiene
- Be up to date with yearly influenza vaccination
- For household members who are not the recipient’s full-time caregivers: to wear a mask when they participate in group activities before
and posttransplant
The first specimen should only be obtained after the first 7 d of the 14-d observation period for respiratory symptoms; the final specimen should be collected after a 14-d symptom-free period.
Specimens collected for SARS-Co-V2 must be collected at least 12 h apart and the final SARS-CoV-2 PCR must be performed within 24–48 h of organ procurement.
Patients with viral pneumonia other than COVID 19 (eg, rhinovirus, RSV, etc.) will be considered for suitability of organ donation on a case-by-case basis.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, COVID-19 has to be considered as a cause for unspecified febrile illness/respiratory tract infection. SARS-CoV-2 PCR and CT Chest to be considered as part of workup
if appropriate.
COVID-19, coronavirus disease 19; CT, computed tomography; CXR, chest radiograph; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; SARS, Severe Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome; TxID, transplant infectious
reconstruction was performed by the donor team in a separate
operating room, before delivery of the organ to the recipient
team. These measures taken by the hospital and transplant
provision of transplant care.
Postoperative Care
Recipients would be nursed strictly in a single room, with
droplet and standard precautions. They would be monitored
closely for the development of infective symptoms and tested
for COVID-19 promptly, if indicated. In the unfortunate event
that the recipient becomes positive for COVID-19, they will
be managed in accordance to the hospital policy. All efforts
will be made to establish if this was a donor-derived infection
(DDI), hospital-acquired, or community-acquired. Hospital
and MOH-sanctioned epidemiology teams would be engaged
to perform the necessary contact tracing.
Additional Considerations
A key consideration before proceeding with transplant surgery is the availability of operating theater and ICU beds, as
these resources may be diverted to the care of patients with
and blood bank stores may compromise the success of transplant surgery in a coagulopathic patient. These factors may
influence recipient selection and the decision to proceed with
CASE DESCRIPTION
In March 2020, when the Disease Outbreak Response
System Condition (DORSCON) alert in Singapore was orange
at another hospital. The cause of death was a cerebrovascular
accident. Collateral history from the next-of-kin established
that the potential donor did not have respiratory symptoms
before admission. The donor fulfilled MOHs requirements for
deceased donor evaluation, and fulfilled our criteria described
were called in to the hospital and evaluated. They too met our
inclusion criteria and provided informed consent to proceed.
The recipient of both lungs was a middle-aged patient
with postinfective bronchiectasis with pulmonary hypertension on long-term oxygen therapy but had no other comorbidities or prior chest surgery. Venous-arterial Extracorporeal
Membrane Oxygenation was used for circulatory support and
to maintain adequate gas exchange in a patient whose surgery
was technically challenging; intraoperative blood transfusion
requirements were also reduced with the use of a cell saver
device. The liver recipient was a middle-aged patient with
hepatocellular carcinoma and a low physiologic model for
end-stage liver disease score. The patient was assessed to be a
low surgical risk candidate and was expected to require minimal blood transfusions during surgery. Our usual immunosuppression protocol for lung and liver transplantation does
not involve T-cell depleting induction therapy. Both patients
received standard doses of steroid and basiliximab for induction. After transplant, they were maintained on tacrolimus
(target trough level between 10–15 and 8–10 μg/L for the lung
and the liver recipients, respectively), mycophenolate mofetil
and followed a standard steroid taper.
Both recipients are negative for COVID-19 on postoperative day 15 and at the time of writing. The recipient of the lung transplant developed bilateral hemothorax,
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia ventilator-associated pneumonia, and required prolonged ventilation due to diaphragmatic
paralysis. The recipient of the liver has since been discharged
to outpatient care.
Closure of a transplant program during an outbreak of
because little is known about the pathogen. Invoking the tenet
Primum non nocere in this setting means we have to consider
the potential for transplant to cause harm by (1) introducing a DDI and (2) placing them at increased risk should
they subsequently become infected with COVID-19 while
of coronaviruses to guide evaluation or testing.23,24 Because
there is no known treatment for COVID-19, there is nothing
that can be given empirically or prophylactically to prevent
its transmission. Therefore, the only way to prevent COVID19 DDI is by excluding infection in the donor. This may be
achieved through history taking and confirmatory testing.25
A detailed history of the donor or from family members or
witnesses (in the case of a deceased donor) may shed light on
the donor’s exposure to the pathogen. The policy of containment and extensive contact-tracing in Singapore has allowed
the chains of transmission to be identified. In addition, MOH
provides a daily press release with details on newly diagnosed
patients with COVID-19 and sites of potential clusters.5 This
dynamic list of COVID-19 clusters is used at the Emergency
Department when screening attendees and by organ procurement coordinators. Despite that, there exist several unlinked
or yet-to-be linked cases. This implies that history taking
alone is not foolproof in excluding COVID-19 and diagnostic
tests are required to complete the evaluation.
The PCR assay for SARS-CoV-2 is now available at many
centers. While a negative result may be used to rule out
COVID-19, we do not know many of the parameters, such
as the negative predictive value of this new test. Even among
pathogens such as HIV, Hepatitis B and C that have established tests with a high negative predictive value, window
period transmissions have been recorded.26 Furthermore, a
recent report of negative tests in a symptomatic patient that
on repeat testing became positive is concerning, even though
this may have been related to sampling or testing issues.27
We also considered testing for SARS-CoV-2 RNAemia in
potential donors. RNAemia was documented in 15% of 41
patients in an early series from Wuhan.28 RNAemia was seen
in both patients that had milder symptoms, and those that
required intensive care. Whether RNAemia translates to infection in solid organs such as the liver is unknown. Moreover,
the period of RNAemia in relation to onset of the symptom
was not described in the report by Huang et al.28 The pervasiveness of SARS-CoV-2 in tissue and body fluids is also not
fully defined. A unique feature of SARS-CoV-2 is its binding
to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptor and that it might
demonstrate tropism to tissues with increased angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 expression, although this hypothesis
has not been confirmed.29 We know from the report by Chen
et al30 that among 9 pregnant women with COVID-19 who
underwent delivery by cesarean section, there was no vertical
transmission—SARS-CoV-2 was not identified in the amniotic
fluid, cord blood, neonatal throat swab, and breast milk.
Presently, the MOH guideline stipulates that a donor must
have 3 sequential negative throat swab PCR tests for SARSCoV-2. These tests should ideally be taken at least 12 h apart,
and within 24–48 h before organ donation. Our institution
introduced the need for a CT chest as an added precaution
after noting reports that CT chest findings predated a positive PCR result and could be used to identify patients with
COVID-19.18-20 In this case, we were sufficiently confident that
Chung et al
the donor did not have COVID-19, given the clinical course
in the ICU, the negative PCR tests and a negative CT chest.
The COVID-19 outbreak is evolving and we are currently
in the acceleration phase of this pandemic. While halting
transplantation may appear logical and in the interest of
patient safety, it is also not without its harms. During SARS,
deferring cancer treatment and postponing diagnostic testing
led to what has been called the “collateral damage” of SARS.4
The same applies to withholding life-saving transplants for
patients on the waiting list who may risk dropping out because
of progression of disease or death. This must be balanced
against the challenges posed by COVID-19, which is likely to
stay for some time. For this very reason, we have proposed a
tiered approach to the selection of cases for transplantation.
Although we have addressed the issue of donor and recipient selection in the peritransplant period to prevent DDIs,
we have to be cognizant that most COVID-19 infections in
the posttransplant period are likely to be acquired from the
community.6,13 Nosocomial transmissions may still be possible but at our hospital, stringent infection prevention policies
(described above) are in place to mitigate this risk. To safely
navigate transplantation during this outbreak, we also have to
recognize the importance of (1) prevention of COVID-19 in
of face masks, isolation, quarantine, social distancing, and
community containment of infected cases) in the absence of
effective pharmacoprophylaxis13,31 and (2) establishing and
continually refining management and treatment strategies for
infected transplant recipients based on available evidence.
Presently, there is little guidance on the management of
the recipient should he or she get infected with COVID-19.
Historical reports of other coronaviruses (SARS and Middle
East Respiratory Syndrome) suggest that they may be lethal in
transplant recipients. The liver transplant recipient described
by Kumar et al3 died from SARS. Of the 2 renal transplant
patients of AlGhamdi et al32 who acquired Middle East
of posttransplant COVID-19 infections in transplant recipients were community acquired.33-40 In addition, outcomes
appear more severe. In a case series of 20 renal transplant
recipients with COVID-19 by Alberici et al,40 85% of cases
required supplementary oxygen therapy, 20% received ICU
care, and the mortality rate was 25%, which is much higher
than the case fatality rate of approximately 2.3% in the general population.8 To improve outcomes of severe COVID-19
in recipients, it is intuitive then to consider either the use of
antiviral therapy or modulation of immunosuppression as
observed in these reports.33-40 However, there are no proven
benefits of either strategy and potential pitfalls exist.
With regard to antiviral therapy, there are no established
therapies to date.41 Although drugs such as hydroxychloroquine/chloroquine ± azithromycin, or lopinavir/ritonavir
have in vivo activity against SARS-CoV-2, and are currently
being used for patients with severe COVID-19, their efficacy is not proven and there may be adverse drug effects.
Hydroxychloroquine/chloroquine ± azithromycin combination is associated with significant gastrointestinal disturbances and patients have to be closely monitoring for toxicity
(in particular QTc prolongation). Lopinavir/ritonavir can
also cause diarrhea. It is also a potent inhibitor of CYP 3A4,
a dose adjustment of the calcineurin inhibitors (tacrolimus/
Transplantation DIRECT
cyclosporine), is needed.41,42 Preliminary data based on the
compassionate use of remdesivir appear promising with 68%
of patients showing clinical improvement.43 This may be a
possible therapeutic option, and we eagerly await the results
of ongoing remdesivir clinical trials.40 Where possible, we
recommend the enrollment of affected patients into the remdesivir clinical trials. For those who do not qualify, we recommend the use of hydroxychloroquine. In patients with severe
illness, the use of convalescent serum or immunomodulatory
therapy with tocilizumab may be considered on a case-by-case
There is no strong evidence on how to modify immunosuppression during acute COVID-19. The severe illness
associated with COVID-19 is associated with an intense
inflammatory response. However, there is no proven benefit in the use of corticosteroids, and potential deleterious
effects (eg, prolonged viral clearance and risk of secondary bacterial and fungal infections) exists.41,44 On the other
hand, it is also not entirely clear how to reduce or discontinue immunosuppression. Although it may bolster native
immune responses, it risks graft rejection which will be a
devastating complication due to the treatment required
to reverse it. Presently, centers with experience managing
COVID-19 in transplant recipients recommend dose reduction of antimetabolites or calcineurin inhibitors in those
with severe infections.41,42
In this pandemic, the patient, transplanted or not, is similarly at the risk of succumbing to COVID-19 either as a
patient with end-stage organ failure or immunosuppressed
after transplant. At each phase of the outbreak, the decision
to proceed with transplantation must be guided by the indication for transplant, availability of manpower and resources,
and overall safety of all parties involved in the procedure. The
known and unknown risks of transplantation are certainly
increased amid this COVID-19 pandemic. However, these
risks may be mitigated if the locale practices an effective containment policy, due to diligence made to exclude COVID-19
in both donor and recipient, and there are robust infectious
prevention processes within the hospital. As more data
emerge, it is likely that we will gain more knowledge to make
the process even safer. Management strategies of COVID-19
after transplant will continue to evolve as more data emerge.
1. World Health Organization. WHO Director-General’s opening
remarks at the media briefing on COVID-19—11 March 2020.
2. Grasselli G, Pesenti A, Cecconi M. Critical care utilization for the COVID19 outbreak in Lombardy, Italy: early experience and forecast during
3. Kumar D, Tellier R, Draker R, et al. Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) in a liver transplant recipient and guidelines for donor SARS screening. Am J Transplant.
4. Bernstein M, Hawryluck L. Challenging beliefs and ethical concepts: the
sg/covid-19. Accessed April 12, 2020.
diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/situation-reports. 2020. Accessed
7. Pan A, Liu L, Wang C, et al. Association of public health interventions
with the epidemiology of the COVID-19 outbreak in Wuhan, China.
8. Lai CC, Shih TP, Ko WC, et al. Severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID19): the epidemic and the challenges. Int J Antimicrob Agents.
9. Wang C, Horby PW, Hayden FG, et al. A novel coronavirus outbreak
10. Chen J. Pathogenicity and transmissibility of 2019-nCoV—A quick
overview and comparison with other emerging viruses. Microbes
11. Wei WE, Li Z, Chiew CJ, et al. Presymptomatic transmission of SARSCoV-2 - Singapore, January 23-March 16, 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal
12. Rothe C, Schunk M, Sothmann P, et al. Transmission of 2019-nCoV
infection from an asymptomatic contact in Germany. N Engl J Med.
13. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: coronavirus disease 2019
gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/cases-updates/summary.html. Accessed
14. Holloway R, Rasmussen SA, Zaza S, et al. Updated preparedness
and response framework for influenza pandemics. MMWR Recomm
15. Ministry of Health, Singapore. Advisory on Health Measures for
Organ and Tissue Recovery and Transplantation: COVID-19 Dorscon
Orange. Singapore: Ministry of Health, Singapore; 2020.
16. Ministry of Health, Singapore. Updated advisory on health measures
for organ and tissue recovery and transplantation: COVID-19 Dorscon
Organe. Singapore: Ministry of Health, Singapore; 2020.
17. Lauer SA, Grantz KH, Bi Q, et al. The incubation period of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) from publicly reported confirmed cases: estimation and application. Ann Intern Med. 2020.
18. Ai T, Yang Z, Hou H, et al. Correlation of chest CT and RT-PCR testing
in coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in China: a report of 1014
19. Fang Y, Zhang H, Xie J, et al. Sensitivity of chest CT for COVID-19:
20. Xie X, Zhong Z, Zhao W, et al. Chest CT for typical 2019-nCoV
pneumonia: relationship to negative RT-PCR testing. Radiology.
21. Cheng LT, Chan LP, Tan BH, et al. Déjà vu or jamais vu? How the
severe acute respiratory syndrome experience influenced a Singapore
22. Angelico R, Trapani S, Manzia TM, et al. The COVID-19 outbreak
in Italy: initial implications for organ transplantation programs. Am J
23. Chong PP, Razonable RR. Diagnostic and management strategies
for donor-derived infections. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2013;27:253–
24. Len O, Garzoni C, Lumbreras C, et al. Recommendations for screening of donor and recipient prior to solid organ transplantation and
to minimize transmission of donor-derived infections. Clin Microbiol
25. Seem DL, Lee I, Umscheid CA, et al; United States Public
Health Service. PHS guideline for reducing human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and hepatitis C virus transmission through organ transplantation. Public Health Rep.
26. Ison MG, Llata E, Conover CS, et al; HIV-HCV Transplantation
immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis C virus from an
organ donor to four transplant recipients. Am J Transplant.
27. Tay JY, Lim PL, Marimuthu K, et al. De-isolating COVID19 suspect cases: a continuing challenge. Clin Infect Dis.
28. Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, et al. Clinical features of patients
infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet.
29. Baig AM, Khaleeq A, Ali U, et al. Evidence of the COVID-19 virus
targeting the CNS: tissue distribution, host-virus interaction,
and proposed neurotropic mechanisms. ACS Chem Neurosci.
30. Chen H, Guo J, Wang C, et al. Clinical characteristics and intrauterine vertical transmission potential of COVID-19 infection in nine
31. Wilder-Smith A, Freedman DO. Isolation, quarantine, social distancing
and community containment: pivotal role for old-style public health
measures in the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) outbreak. J Travel
32. AlGhamdi M, Mushtaq F, Awn N, et al. MERS CoV infection in
two renal transplant recipients: case report. Am J Transplant.
33. Zhang H, Chen Y, Yuan Q, et al. Identification of kidney transplant recipients
34. Zhu L, Xu X, Ma K, et al. Successful recovery of COVID-19 pneumonia
in a renal transplant recipient with long-term immunosuppression. Am
36. Huang JF, Zheng KI, George J, et al. Fatal outcome in a liver transplant
37. Wang J, Li X, Cao G, et al. COVID-19 in a kidney transplant patient. Eur
Chung et al
38. Seminari E, Colaneri M, Sambo M, et al. SARS Cov2 infection in a
renal transplanted patients. A case report. Am J Transplant. 2020.
40. Alberici F, Delbarba E, Manenti C, et al. A single center observational
study of the clinical characteristics and short-term outcome of 20 kidney transplant patients admitted for SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia. Kidney
41. Bhimraj A, Morgan RL, Shumaker AH, et al. Infectious Diseases
Society of America Guidelines on the treatment and management
idsociety.org/practice-guideline/covid-19-guideline-treatment-andmanagement/. Accessed April 12, 2020.
42. Liu H, He X, Wang Y, et al. Management of COVID-19 in patients
43. Grein J, Ohmagari N, Shin D, et al. Compassionate use of remdesivir for patients with severe COVID-19. N Engl J Med. 2020.
44. Workgroup C-T. National Center for Infectious Diseases (Singapore):
interim treatment guidelines for COVID-19 version 1.0. 2020.
45. Government of Singapore: what do the different DORSCON levels
